The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Romans 
 
Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated 
unto the gospel of God, 
 
(Which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy scriptures,) 
 
Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed 
of David according to the flesh; 
 
And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit 
of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead: 
 
By whom we have received grace and apostleship, for obedience to the 
faith among all nations, for his name: 
 
Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ: 
 
To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints: Grace to 
you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
 
First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your 
faith is spoken of throughout the whole world. 
 
For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of 
his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my 
prayers; 
 
Making request, if by any means now at length I might have a 
prosperous journey by the will of God to come unto you. 
 
For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, 
to the end ye may be established; 
 
That is, that I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith 
both of you and me. 
 
Now I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that oftentimes I 
purposed to come unto you, (but was let hitherto,) that I might have 
some fruit among you also, even as among other Gentiles. 
 
I am debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; both to the 
wise, and to the unwise. 
 
So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the gospel to you that 
are at Rome also. 
 
For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of 
God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and 
also to the Greek. 
 
For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: 
as it is written, The just shall live by faith. 
 
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness 
and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness; 
 
Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God 
hath shewed it unto them. 
 
For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are 
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his 
eternal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: 
 
Because that, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, 
neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and 
their foolish heart was darkened. 
 
Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, 
 
And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like 
to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping 
things. 
 
Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of 
their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves: 
 
Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the 
creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen. 
 
For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their 
women did change the natural use into that which is against nature: 
 
And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, 
burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that 
which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of 
their error which was meet. 
 
And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God 
gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not 
convenient; 
 
Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, 
covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, 
malignity; whisperers, 
 
Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of 
evil things, disobedient to parents, 
 
Without understanding, covenantbreakers, without natural affection, 
implacable, unmerciful: 
 
Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things 
are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them 
that do them. 
 
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that 
judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; 
for thou that judgest doest the same things. 
 
But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against 
them which commit such things. 
 
And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, 
and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? 
 
Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and 
longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to 
repentance? 
 
But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself 
wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous 
judgment of God; 
 
Who will render to every man according to his deeds: 
 
To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and 
honour and immortality, eternal life: 
 
But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but 
obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, 
 
Tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of 
the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; 
 
But glory, honour, and peace, to every man that worketh good, to the 
Jew first, and also to the Gentile: 
 
For there is no respect of persons with God. 
 
For as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without law: 
and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law; 
 
(For not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of 
the law shall be justified. 
 
For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things 
contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto 
themselves: 
 
Which shew the work of the law written in their hearts, their 
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while 
accusing or else excusing one another;) 
 
In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ 
according to my gospel. 
 
Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and makest thy 
boast of God, 
 
And knowest his will, and approvest the things that are more 
excellent, being instructed out of the law; 
 
And art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light 
of them which are in darkness, 
 
An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which hast the form 
of knowledge and of the truth in the law. 
 
Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself? thou 
that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal? 
 
Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit 
adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege? 
 
Thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law 
dishonourest thou God? 
 
For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as 
it is written. 
 
For circumcision verily profiteth, if thou keep the law: but if thou 
be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. 
 
Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law, 
shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? 
 
And shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law, 
judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the 
law? 
 
For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that 
circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: 
 
But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of 
the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not 
of men, but of God. 
 
What advantage then hath the Jew? or what profit is there of 
circumcision? 
 
Much every way: chiefly, because that unto them were committed the 
oracles of God. 
 
For what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the faith 
of God without effect? 
 
God forbid: yea, let God be true, but every man a liar; as it is 
written, That thou mightest be justified in thy sayings, and mightest 
overcome when thou art judged. 
 
But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what 
shall we say? Is God unrighteous who taketh vengeance? (I speak as a 
man) 
 
God forbid: for then how shall God judge the world? 
 
For if the truth of God hath more abounded through my lie unto his 
glory; why yet am I also judged as a sinner? 
 
And not rather, (as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm 
that we say,) Let us do evil, that good may come? whose damnation is 
just. 
 
What then? are we better than they? No, in no wise: for we have before 
proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin; 
 
As it is written, There is none righteous, no, not one: 
 
There is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after 
God. 
 
They are all gone out of the way, they are together become 
unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no, not one. 
 
Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used 
deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips: 
 
Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: 
 
Their feet are swift to shed blood: 
 
Destruction and misery are in their ways: 
 
And the way of peace have they not known: 
 
There is no fear of God before their eyes. 
 
Now we know that what things soever the law saith, it saith to them 
who are under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the 
world may become guilty before God. 
 
Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in 
his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin. 
 
But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being 
witnessed by the law and the prophets; 
 
Even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto 
all and upon all them that believe: for there is no difference: 
 
For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God; 
 
Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus: 
 
Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his 
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are 
past, through the forbearance of God; 
 
To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness: that he might be 
just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus. 
 
Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: 
but by the law of faith. 
 
Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the 
deeds of the law. 
 
Is he the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, 
of the Gentiles also: 
 
Seeing it is one God, which shall justify the circumcision by faith, 
and uncircumcision through faith. 
 
Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we 
establish the law. 
 
What shall we say then that Abraham our father, as pertaining to the 
flesh, hath found? 
 
For if Abraham were justified by works, he hath whereof to glory; but 
not before God. 
 
For what saith the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted 
unto him for righteousness. 
 
Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of 
debt. 
 
But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the 
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. 
 
Even as David also describeth the blessedness of the man, unto whom 
God imputeth righteousness without works, 
 
Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins 
are covered. 
 
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. 
 
Cometh this blessedness then upon the circumcision only, or upon the 
uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for 
righteousness. 
 
How was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in 
uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision. 
 
And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness 
of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might be 
the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised; 
that righteousness might be imputed unto them also: 
 
And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision 
only, but who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father 
Abraham, which he had being yet uncircumcised. 
 
For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was not to 
Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the 
righteousness of faith. 
 
For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the 
promise made of none effect: 
 
Because the law worketh wrath: for where no law is, there is no 
transgression. 
 
Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end the 
promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of 
the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham; who is the 
father of us all, 
 
(As it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations,) before 
him whom he believed, even God, who quickeneth the dead, and calleth 
those things which be not as though they were. 
 
Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the father of 
many nations; according to that which was spoken, So shall thy seed 
be. 
 
And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, 
when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of 
Sarah's womb: 
 
He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was 
strong in faith, giving glory to God; 
 
And being fully persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also 
to perform. 
 
And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness. 
 
Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him; 
 
But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him 
that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; 
 
Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our 
justification. 
 
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our 
Lord Jesus Christ: 
 
By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, 
and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. 
 
And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that 
tribulation worketh patience; 
 
And patience, experience; and experience, hope: 
 
And hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in 
our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. 
 
For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the 
ungodly. 
 
For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet peradventure for a 
good man some would even dare to die. 
 
But God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet 
sinners, Christ died for us. 
 
Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved 
from wrath through him. 
 
For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death 
of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his 
life. 
 
And not only so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, 
by whom we have now received the atonement. 
 
Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; 
and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: 
 
(For until the law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when 
there is no law. 
 
Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had 
not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression, who is the 
figure of him that was to come. 
 
But not as the offence, so also is the free gift. For if through the 
offence of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift 
by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many. 
 
And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment 
was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offences unto 
justification. 
 
For if by one man's offence death reigned by one; much more they which 
receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall 
reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.) 
 
Therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to 
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came 
upon all men unto justification of life. 
 
For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the 
obedience of one shall many be made righteous. 
 
Moreover the law entered, that the offence might abound. But where sin 
abounded, grace did much more abound: 
 
That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through 
righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord. 
 
What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may 
abound? 
 
God forbid. How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer 
therein? 
 
Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ 
were baptized into his death? 
 
Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as 
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so 
we also should walk in newness of life. 
 
For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we 
shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection: 
 
Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of 
sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. 
 
For he that is dead is freed from sin. 
 
Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with 
him: 
 
Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; death 
hath no more dominion over him. 
 
For in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he 
liveth unto God. 
 
Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but 
alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
 
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey 
it in the lusts thereof. 
 
Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto 
sin: but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the 
dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God. 
 
For sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the 
law, but under grace. 
 
What then? shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but under 
grace? God forbid. 
 
Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his 
servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of 
obedience unto righteousness? 
 
But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have 
obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you. 
 
Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of 
righteousness. 
 
I speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of your 
flesh: for as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and 
to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to 
righteousness unto holiness. 
 
For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness. 
 
What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for 
the end of those things is death. 
 
But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have 
your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. 
 
For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
 
Know ye not, brethren, (for I speak to them that know the law,) how 
that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth? 
 
For the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to her husband 
so long as he liveth; but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from 
the law of her husband. 
 
So then if, while her husband liveth, she be married to another man, 
she shall be called an adulteress: but if her husband be dead, she is 
free from that law; so that she is no adulteress, though she be 
married to another man. 
 
Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body 
of Christ; that ye should be married to another, even to him who is 
raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. 
 
For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by the 
law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. 
 
But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were 
held; that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the 
oldness of the letter. 
 
What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not 
known sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law 
had said, Thou shalt not covet. 
 
But sin, taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner 
of concupiscence. For without the law sin was dead. 
 
For I was alive without the law once: but when the commandment came, 
sin revived, and I died. 
 
And the commandment, which was ordained to life, I found to be unto 
death. 
 
For sin, taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by it 
slew me. 
 
Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and 
good. 
 
Was then that which is good made death unto me? God forbid. But sin, 
that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good; 
that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful. 
 
For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under 
sin. 
 
For that which I do I allow not: for what I would, that do I not; but 
what I hate, that do I. 
 
If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that it is 
good. 
 
Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. 
 
For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing: 
for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good 
I find not. 
 
For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, 
that I do. 
 
Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that 
dwelleth in me. 
 
I find then a law, that, when I would do good, evil is present with 
me. 
 
For I delight in the law of God after the inward man: 
 
But I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my 
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my 
members. 
 
O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this 
death? 
 
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then with the mind I 
myself serve the law of God; but with the flesh the law of sin. 
 
There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ 
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 
 
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free 
from the law of sin and death. 
 
For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, 
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, 
condemned sin in the flesh: 
 
That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 
 
For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but 
they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit. 
 
For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is 
life and peace. 
 
Because the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject 
to the law of God, neither indeed can be. 
 
So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. 
 
But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the 
Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of 
Christ, he is none of his. 
 
And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the 
Spirit is life because of righteousness. 
 
But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in 
you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your 
mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you. 
 
Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after 
the flesh. 
 
For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the 
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. 
 
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. 
 
For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye 
have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. 
 
The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the 
children of God: 
 
And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with 
Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also 
glorified together. 
 
For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy 
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. 
 
For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the 
manifestation of the sons of God. 
 
For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by 
reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope, 
 
Because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage 
of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God. 
 
For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain 
together until now. 
 
And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of 
the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the 
adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. 
 
For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for what 
a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? 
 
But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for 
it. 
 
Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what 
we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh 
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. 
 
And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the 
Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the 
will of God. 
 
And we know that all things work together for good to them that love 
God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. 
 
For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to 
the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many 
brethren. 
 
Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he 
called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also 
glorified. 
 
What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be 
against us? 
 
He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how 
shall he not with him also freely give us all things? 
 
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that 
justifieth. 
 
Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is 
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh 
intercession for us. 
 
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or 
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? 
 
As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are 
accounted as sheep for the slaughter. 
 
Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that 
loved us. 
 
For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor 
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, 
 
Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to 
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
 
I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me 
witness in the Holy Ghost, 
 
That I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. 
 
For I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my 
brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh: 
 
Who are Israelites; to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, 
and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, 
and the promises; 
 
Whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ 
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. 
 
Not as though the word of God hath taken none effect. For they are not 
all Israel, which are of Israel: 
 
Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: 
but, In Isaac shall thy seed be called. 
 
That is, They which are the children of the flesh, these are not the 
children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the 
seed. 
 
For this is the word of promise, At this time will I come, and Sarah 
shall have a son. 
 
And not only this; but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, even by 
our father Isaac; 
 
(For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or 
evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not 
of works, but of him that calleth;) 
 
It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger. 
 
As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. 
 
What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. 
 
For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, 
and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. 
 
So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of 
God that sheweth mercy. 
 
For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have 
I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my name 
might be declared throughout all the earth. 
 
Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will 
he hardeneth. 
 
Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet find fault? For who hath 
resisted his will? 
 
Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the 
thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? 
 
Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one 
vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour? 
 
What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known, 
endured with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to 
destruction: 
 
And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of 
mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory, 
 
Even us, whom he hath called, not of the Jews only, but also of the 
Gentiles? 
 
As he saith also in Osee, I will call them my people, which were not 
my people; and her beloved, which was not beloved. 
 
And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto 
them, Ye are not my people; there shall they be called the children of 
the living God. 
 
Esaias also crieth concerning Israel, Though the number of the 
children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be 
saved: 
 
For he will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness: 
because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth. 
 
And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a 
seed, we had been as Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrha. 
 
What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not after 
righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness 
which is of faith. 
 
But Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not 
attained to the law of righteousness. 
 
Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the 
works of the law. For they stumbled at that stumblingstone; 
 
As it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of 
offence: and whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed. 
 
Brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they 
might be saved. 
 
For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not according 
to knowledge. 
 
For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to 
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto 
the righteousness of God. 
 
For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that 
believeth. 
 
For Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law, That the 
man which doeth those things shall live by them. 
 
But the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise, Say not 
in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring 
Christ down from above:) 
 
Or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ 
again from the dead.) 
 
But what saith it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in 
thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach; 
 
That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt 
believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou 
shalt be saved. 
 
For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the 
mouth confession is made unto salvation. 
 
For the scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shall not be 
ashamed. 
 
For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek: for the same 
Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him. 
 
For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. 
 
How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and 
how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how 
shall they hear without a preacher? 
 
And how shall they preach, except they be sent? as it is written, How 
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and 
bring glad tidings of good things! 
 
But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Esaias saith, Lord, who 
hath believed our report? 
 
So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. 
 
But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all 
the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world. 
 
But I say, Did not Israel know? First Moses saith, I will provoke you 
to jealousy by them that are no people, and by a foolish nation I will 
anger you. 
 
But Esaias is very bold, and saith, I was found of them that sought me 
not; I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me. 
 
But to Israel he saith, All day long I have stretched forth my hands 
unto a disobedient and gainsaying people. 
 
I say then, Hath God cast away his people? God forbid. For I also am 
an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. 
 
God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew. Wot ye not what 
the scripture saith of Elias? how he maketh intercession to God 
against Israel, saying, 
 
Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and digged down thine altars; and 
I am left alone, and they seek my life. 
 
But what saith the answer of God unto him? I have reserved to myself 
seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the image of Baal. 
 
Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to 
the election of grace. 
 
And if by grace, then is it no more of works: otherwise grace is no 
more grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace: otherwise 
work is no more work. 
 
What then? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the 
election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded 
 
(According as it is written, God hath given them the spirit of 
slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not 
hear;) unto this day. 
 
And David saith, Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a 
stumblingblock, and a recompence unto them: 
 
Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see, and bow down their 
back alway. 
 
I say then, Have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid: but 
rather through their fall salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for to 
provoke them to jealousy. 
 
Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the 
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their 
fulness? 
 
For I speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch as I am the apostle of the 
Gentiles, I magnify mine office: 
 
If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, 
and might save some of them. 
 
For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what 
shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead? 
 
For if the firstfruit be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root 
be holy, so are the branches. 
 
And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou, being a wild 
olive tree, wert graffed in among them, and with them partakest of the 
root and fatness of the olive tree; 
 
Boast not against the branches. But if thou boast, thou bearest not 
the root, but the root thee. 
 
Thou wilt say then, The branches were broken off, that I might be 
graffed in. 
 
Well; because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou standest by 
faith. Be not highminded, but fear: 
 
For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also 
spare not thee. 
 
Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which fell, 
severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness: 
otherwise thou also shalt be cut off. 
 
And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed 
in: for God is able to graff them in again. 
 
For if thou wert cut out of the olive tree which is wild by nature, 
and wert graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree: how much 
more shall these, which be the natural branches, be graffed into their 
own olive tree? 
 
For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, 
lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness in part is 
happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in. 
 
And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come 
out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: 
 
For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins. 
 
As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: but as 
touching the election, they are beloved for the fathers' sakes. 
 
For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. 
 
For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained 
mercy through their unbelief: 
 
Even so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy they 
also may obtain mercy. 
 
For God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy 
upon all. 
 
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how 
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! 
 
For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his 
counsellor? 
 
Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him 
again? 
 
For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things: to whom be 
glory for ever. Amen. 
 
I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
which is your reasonable service. 
 
And be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the 
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and 
acceptable, and perfect, will of God. 
 
For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among 
you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but 
to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure 
of faith. 
 
For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the 
same office: 
 
So we, being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one 
of another. 
 
Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to 
us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of 
faith; 
 
Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering: or he that teacheth, on 
teaching; 
 
Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: he that giveth, let him do it 
with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence; he that sheweth 
mercy, with cheerfulness. 
 
Let love be without dissimulation. Abhor that which is evil; cleave to 
that which is good. 
 
Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love; in honour 
preferring one another; 
 
Not slothful in business; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord; 
 
Rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation; continuing instant in 
prayer; 
 
Distributing to the necessity of saints; given to hospitality. 
 
Bless them which persecute you: bless, and curse not. 
 
Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. 
 
Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things, but 
condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits. 
 
Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight 
of all men. 
 
If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all 
men. 
 
Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto 
wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the 
Lord. 
 
Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him 
drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head. 
 
Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. 
 
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no 
power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God. 
 
Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of 
God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. 
 
For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou 
then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shalt 
have praise of the same: 
 
For he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that 
which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain: for he 
is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that 
doeth evil. 
 
Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for 
conscience sake. 
 
For for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God's ministers, 
attending continually upon this very thing. 
 
Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due; 
custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour. 
 
Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loveth 
another hath fulfilled the law. 
 
For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou 
shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not 
covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly 
comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 
thyself. 
 
Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling 
of the law. 
 
And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of 
sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. 
 
The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off 
the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light. 
 
Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, 
not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying. 
 
But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the 
flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof. 
 
Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful 
disputations. 
 
For one believeth that he may eat all things: another, who is weak, 
eateth herbs. 
 
Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not him 
which eateth not judge him that eateth: for God hath received him. 
 
Who art thou that judgest another man's servant? to his own master he 
standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to 
make him stand. 
 
One man esteemeth one day above another: another esteemeth every day 
alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. 
 
He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord; and he that 
regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it. He that 
eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he that 
eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks. 
 
For none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself. 
 
For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die 
unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's. 
 
For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might 
be Lord both of the dead and living. 
 
But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at nought 
thy brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment seat of 
Christ. 
 
For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to 
me, and every tongue shall confess to God. 
 
So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God. 
 
Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this 
rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in his 
brother's way. 
 
I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing 
unclean of itself: but to him that esteemeth any thing to be unclean, 
to him it is unclean. 
 
But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not 
charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. 
 
Let not then your good be evil spoken of: 
 
For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and 
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. 
 
For he that in these things serveth Christ is acceptable to God, and 
approved of men. 
 
Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and 
things wherewith one may edify another. 
 
For meat destroy not the work of God. All things indeed are pure; but 
it is evil for that man who eateth with offence. 
 
It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing 
whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. 
 
Hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God. Happy is he that 
condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth. 
 
And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of 
faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. 
 
We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and 
not to please ourselves. 
 
Let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to edification. 
 
For even Christ pleased not himself; but, as it is written, The 
reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me. 
 
For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our 
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might 
have hope. 
 
Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be likeminded one 
toward another according to Christ Jesus: 
 
That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
 
Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the 
glory of God. 
 
Now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the 
truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers: 
 
And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy; as it is 
written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and 
sing unto thy name. 
 
And again he saith, Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his people. 
 
And again, Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles; and laud him, all ye 
people. 
 
And again, Esaias saith, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that 
shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; in him shall the Gentiles 
trust. 
 
Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that 
ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost. 
 
And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye also are 
full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one 
another. 
 
Nevertheless, brethren, I have written the more boldly unto you in 
some sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is given 
to me of God, 
 
That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, 
ministering the gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles 
might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. 
 
I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ in those 
things which pertain to God. 
 
For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ hath 
not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient, by word and deed, 
 
Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God; 
so that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully 
preached the gospel of Christ. 
 
Yea, so have I strived to preach the gospel, not where Christ was 
named, lest I should build upon another man's foundation: 
 
But as it is written, To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see: 
and they that have not heard shall understand. 
 
For which cause also I have been much hindered from coming to you. 
 
But now having no more place in these parts, and having a great desire 
these many years to come unto you; 
 
Whensoever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you: for I 
trust to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way 
thitherward by you, if first I be somewhat filled with your company. 
 
But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the saints. 
 
For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain 
contribution for the poor saints which are at Jerusalem. 
 
It hath pleased them verily; and their debtors they are. For if the 
Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their 
duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things. 
 
When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them this 
fruit, I will come by you into Spain. 
 
And I am sure that, when I come unto you, I shall come in the fulness 
of the blessing of the gospel of Christ. 
 
Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for 
the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in your 
prayers to God for me; 
 
That I may be delivered from them that do not believe in Judaea; and 
that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be accepted of the 
saints; 
 
That I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may with you 
be refreshed. 
 
Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen. 
 
I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the church 
which is at Cenchrea: 
 
That ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye 
assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you: for she hath 
been a succourer of many, and of myself also. 
 
Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus: 
 
Who have for my life laid down their own necks: unto whom not only I 
give thanks, but also all the churches of the Gentiles. 
 
Likewise greet the church that is in their house. Salute my 
wellbeloved Epaenetus, who is the firstfruits of Achaia unto Christ. 
 
Greet Mary, who bestowed much labour on us. 
 
Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellowprisoners, who 
are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me. 
 
Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord. 
 
Salute Urbane, our helper in Christ, and Stachys my beloved. 
 
Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute them which are of 
Aristobulus' household. 
 
Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet them that be of the household of 
Narcissus, which are in the Lord. 
 
Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour in the Lord. Salute the 
beloved Persis, which laboured much in the Lord. 
 
Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine. 
 
Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren 
which are with them. 
 
Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and 
all the saints which are with them. 
 
Salute one another with an holy kiss. The churches of Christ salute 
you. 
 
Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and 
offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid 
them. 
 
For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own 
belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the 
simple. 
 
For your obedience is come abroad unto all men. I am glad therefore on 
your behalf: but yet I would have you wise unto that which is good, 
and simple concerning evil. 
 
And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The 
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. 
 
Timotheus my workfellow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my 
kinsmen, salute you. 
 
I Tertius, who wrote this epistle, salute you in the Lord. 
 
Gaius mine host, and of the whole church, saluteth you. Erastus the 
chamberlain of the city saluteth you, and Quartus a brother. 
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. 
 
Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my gospel, 
and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the 
mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, 
 
But now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, 
according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all 
nations for the obedience of faith: 
 
To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen. 
 
The First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians 
 
Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, 
and Sosthenes our brother, 
 
Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are 
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all that in 
every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs 
and ours: 
 
Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 
 
I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is 
given you by Jesus Christ; 
 
That in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance, and in 
all knowledge; 
 
Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you: 
 
So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: 
 
Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in 
the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
 
God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son 
Jesus Christ our Lord. 
 
Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among 
you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in 
the same judgment. 
 
For it hath been declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them which 
are of the house of Chloe, that there are contentions among you. 
 
Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of 
Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ. 
 
Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in 
the name of Paul? 
 
I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius; 
 
Lest any should say that I had baptized in mine own name. 
 
And I baptized also the household of Stephanas: besides, I know not 
whether I baptized any other. 
 
For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel: not with 
wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none 
effect. 
 
For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness; but 
unto us which are saved it is the power of God. 
 
For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will 
bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. 
 
Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this 
world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? 
 
For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, 
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that 
believe. 
 
For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom: 
 
But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and 
unto the Greeks foolishness; 
 
But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power 
of God, and the wisdom of God. 
 
Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of 
God is stronger than men. 
 
For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after 
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: 
 
But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the 
wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the 
things which are mighty; 
 
And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God 
chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that 
are: 
 
That no flesh should glory in his presence. 
 
But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, 
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: 
 
That, according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in 
the Lord. 
 
And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of 
speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God. 
 
For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, 
and him crucified. 
 
And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling. 
 
And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's 
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: 
 
That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the 
power of God. 
 
Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the 
wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to 
nought: 
 
But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, 
which God ordained before the world unto our glory: 
 
Which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it, 
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. 
 
But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have 
entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for 
them that love him. 
 
But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit 
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God. 
 
For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which 
is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of 
God. 
 
Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit 
which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given 
to us of God. 
 
Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom 
teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual 
things with spiritual. 
 
But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for 
they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they 
are spiritually discerned. 
 
But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged 
of no man. 
 
For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But 
we have the mind of Christ. 
 
And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as 
unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. 
 
I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were not 
able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. 
 
For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envying, and 
strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? 
 
For while one saith, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollos; are 
ye not carnal? 
 
Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers by whom ye 
believed, even as the Lord gave to every man? 
 
I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. 
 
So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that 
watereth; but God that giveth the increase. 
 
Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one: and every man shall 
receive his own reward according to his own labour. 
 
For we are labourers together with God: ye are God's husbandry, ye are 
God's building. 
 
According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise 
masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth 
thereon. But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon. 
 
For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus 
Christ. 
 
Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious 
stones, wood, hay, stubble; 
 
Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, 
because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every 
man's work of what sort it is. 
 
If any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall 
receive a reward. 
 
If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he 
himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire. 
 
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you? 
 
If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the 
temple of God is holy, which temple ye are. 
 
Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be wise in 
this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. 
 
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is 
written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness. 
 
And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are 
vain. 
 
Therefore let no man glory in men. For all things are yours; 
 
Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, 
or things present, or things to come; all are yours; 
 
And ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's. 
 
Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and 
stewards of the mysteries of God. 
 
Moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful. 
 
But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, 
or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self. 
 
For I know nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified: but he 
that judgeth me is the Lord. 
 
Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both 
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make 
manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have 
praise of God. 
 
And these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself 
and to Apollos for your sakes; that ye might learn in us not to think 
of men above that which is written, that no one of you be puffed up 
for one against another. 
 
For who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou that 
thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou 
glory, as if thou hadst not received it? 
 
Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as kings without us: 
and I would to God ye did reign, that we also might reign with you. 
 
For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were 
appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to 
angels, and to men. 
 
We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are 
weak, but ye are strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised. 
 
Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, 
and are buffeted, and have no certain dwellingplace; 
 
And labour, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being 
persecuted, we suffer it: 
 
Being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and 
are the offscouring of all things unto this day. 
 
I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn 
you. 
 
For though ye have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have ye not 
many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the 
gospel. 
 
Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me. 
 
For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved son, 
and faithful in the Lord, who shall bring you into remembrance of my 
ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where in every church. 
 
Now some are puffed up, as though I would not come to you. 
 
But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know, not 
the speech of them which are puffed up, but the power. 
 
For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. 
 
What will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the 
spirit of meekness? 
 
It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such 
fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one 
should have his father's wife. 
 
And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that hath 
done this deed might be taken away from among you. 
 
For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged 
already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath so done 
this deed, 
 
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, 
and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
 
To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, 
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 
 
Your glorying is not good. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth 
the whole lump? 
 
Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye 
are unleavened. For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us: 
 
Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the 
leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of 
sincerity and truth. 
 
I wrote unto you in an epistle not to company with fornicators: 
 
Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the 
covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters; for then must ye needs 
go out of the world. 
 
But now I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man that 
is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a 
railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one no not to 
eat. 
 
For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? do not ye 
judge them that are within? 
 
But them that are without God judgeth. Therefore put away from among 
yourselves that wicked person. 
 
Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before the 
unjust, and not before the saints? 
 
Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world 
shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? 
 
Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that 
pertain to this life? 
 
If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them 
to judge who are least esteemed in the church. 
 
I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man among 
you? no, not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren? 
 
But brother goeth to law with brother, and that before the 
unbelievers. 
 
Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law 
one with another. Why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not 
rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded? 
 
Nay, ye do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren. 
 
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? 
Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, 
nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, 
 
Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor 
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. 
 
And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 
but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit 
of our God. 
 
All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient: all 
things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of 
any. 
 
Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats: but God shall destroy 
both it and them. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the 
Lord; and the Lord for the body. 
 
And God hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his 
own power. 
 
Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then 
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? 
God forbid. 
 
What? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one body? 
for two, saith he, shall be one flesh. 
 
But he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit. 
 
Flee fornication. Every sin that a man doeth is without the body; but 
he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body. 
 
What? know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which 
is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? 
 
For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, 
and in your spirit, which are God's. 
 
Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: It is good for a 
man not to touch a woman. 
 
Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, 
and let every woman have her own husband. 
 
Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise 
also the wife unto the husband. 
 
The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband: and likewise 
also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife. 
 
Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, 
that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together 
again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency. 
 
But I speak this by permission, and not of commandment. 
 
For I would that all men were even as I myself. But every man hath his 
proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that. 
 
I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is good for them if 
they abide even as I. 
 
But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to marry 
than to burn. 
 
And unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, Let not the 
wife depart from her husband: 
 
But and if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to 
her husband: and let not the husband put away his wife. 
 
But to the rest speak I, not the Lord: If any brother hath a wife that 
believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put 
her away. 
 
And the woman which hath an husband that believeth not, and if he be 
pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him. 
 
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the 
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your children 
unclean; but now are they holy. 
 
But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister 
is not under bondage in such cases: but God hath called us to peace. 
 
For what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband? or 
how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife? 
 
But as God hath distributed to every man, as the Lord hath called 
every one, so let him walk. And so ordain I in all churches. 
 
Is any man called being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised. 
Is any called in uncircumcision? let him not be circumcised. 
 
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the 
keeping of the commandments of God. 
 
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. 
 
Art thou called being a servant? care not for it: but if thou mayest 
be made free, use it rather. 
 
For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lord's 
freeman: likewise also he that is called, being free, is Christ's 
servant. 
 
Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men. 
 
Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, therein abide with God. 
 
Now concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord: yet I give 
my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be 
faithful. 
 
I suppose therefore that this is good for the present distress, I say, 
that it is good for a man so to be. 
 
Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed 
from a wife? seek not a wife. 
 
But and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin marry, 
she hath not sinned. Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the 
flesh: but I spare you. 
 
But this I say, brethren, the time is short: it remaineth, that both 
they that have wives be as though they had none; 
 
And they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as 
though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed 
not; 
 
And they that use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of 
this world passeth away. 
 
But I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried careth 
for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord: 
 
But he that is married careth for the things that are of the world, 
how he may please his wife. 
 
There is difference also between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried 
woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in 
body and in spirit: but she that is married careth for the things of 
the world, how she may please her husband. 
 
And this I speak for your own profit; not that I may cast a snare upon 
you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend upon the 
Lord without distraction. 
 
But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his 
virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so require, let 
him do what he will, he sinneth not: let them marry. 
 
Nevertheless he that standeth stedfast in his heart, having no 
necessity, but hath power over his own will, and hath so decreed in 
his heart that he will keep his virgin, doeth well. 
 
So then he that giveth her in marriage doeth well; but he that giveth 
her not in marriage doeth better. 
 
The wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth; but if her 
husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will; 
only in the Lord. 
 
But she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment: and I think 
also that I have the Spirit of God. 
 
Now as touching things offered unto idols, we know that we all have 
knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth. 
 
And if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet 
as he ought to know. 
 
But if any man love God, the same is known of him. 
 
As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered in 
sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, 
and that there is none other God but one. 
 
For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in 
earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many,) 
 
But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, 
and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and 
we by him. 
 
Howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge: for some with 
conscience of the idol unto this hour eat it as a thing offered unto 
an idol; and their conscience being weak is defiled. 
 
But meat commendeth us not to God: for neither, if we eat, are we the 
better; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse. 
 
But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a 
stumblingblock to them that are weak. 
 
For if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol's 
temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to 
eat those things which are offered to idols; 
 
And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom 
Christ died? 
 
But when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak 
conscience, ye sin against Christ. 
 
Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh 
while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend. 
 
Am I not an apostle? am I not free? have I not seen Jesus Christ our 
Lord? are not ye my work in the Lord? 
 
If I be not an apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to you: for the 
seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord. 
 
Mine answer to them that do examine me is this, 
 
Have we not power to eat and to drink? 
 
Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other 
apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? 
 
Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working? 
 
Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a 
vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, 
and eateth not of the milk of the flock? 
 
Say I these things as a man? or saith not the law the same also? 
 
For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth 
of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen? 
 
Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this 
is written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that 
thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope. 
 
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we 
shall reap your carnal things? 
 
If others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? 
Nevertheless we have not used this power; but suffer all things, lest 
we should hinder the gospel of Christ. 
 
Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things live of the 
things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar are partakers 
with the altar? 
 
Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel 
should live of the gospel. 
 
But I have used none of these things: neither have I written these 
things, that it should be so done unto me: for it were better for me 
to die, than that any man should make my glorying void. 
 
For though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for 
necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the 
gospel! 
 
For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward: but if against my 
will, a dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me. 
 
What is my reward then? Verily that, when I preach the gospel, I may 
make the gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in 
the gospel. 
 
For though I be free from all men, yet have I made myself servant unto 
all, that I might gain the more. 
 
And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to 
them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them 
that are under the law; 
 
To them that are without law, as without law, (being not without law 
to God, but under the law to Christ,) that I might gain them that are 
without law. 
 
To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made 
all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. 
 
And this I do for the gospel's sake, that I might be partaker thereof 
with you. 
 
Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one receiveth 
the prize? So run, that ye may obtain. 
 
And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all 
things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown; but we an 
incorruptible. 
 
I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that 
beateth the air: 
 
But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by 
any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a 
castaway. 
 
Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that 
all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; 
 
And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; 
 
And did all eat the same spiritual meat; 
 
And did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that 
spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ. 
 
But with many of them God was not well pleased: for they were 
overthrown in the wilderness. 
 
Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust 
after evil things, as they also lusted. 
 
Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written, The 
people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. 
 
Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell 
in one day three and twenty thousand. 
 
Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were 
destroyed of serpents. 
 
Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed 
of the destroyer. 
 
Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are 
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. 
 
Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall. 
 
There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man: but 
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye 
are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that 
ye may be able to bear it. 
 
Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from idolatry. 
 
I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say. 
 
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the 
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of 
the body of Christ? 
 
For we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all 
partakers of that one bread. 
 
Behold Israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of the 
sacrifices partakers of the altar? 
 
What say I then? that the idol is any thing, or that which is offered 
in sacrifice to idols is any thing? 
 
But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they 
sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should 
have fellowship with devils. 
 
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot 
be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of devils. 
 
Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he? 
 
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all 
things are lawful for me, but all things edify not. 
 
Let no man seek his own, but every man another's wealth. 
 
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for 
conscience sake: 
 
For the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof. 
 
If any of them that believe not bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed 
to go; whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for 
conscience sake. 
 
But if any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto idols, 
eat not for his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake: for the 
earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof: 
 
Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the other: for why is my 
liberty judged of another man's conscience? 
 
For if I by grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for 
which I give thanks? 
 
Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the 
glory of God. 
 
Give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to 
the church of God: 
 
Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, 
but the profit of many, that they may be saved. 
 
Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. 
 
Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and 
keep the ordinances, as I delivered them to you. 
 
But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and 
the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God. 
 
Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered, 
dishonoureth his head. 
 
But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered 
dishonoureth her head: for that is even all one as if she were shaven. 
 
For if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn: but if it be a 
shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered. 
 
For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the 
image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of the man. 
 
For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of the man. 
 
Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man. 
 
For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head because of 
the angels. 
 
Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman 
without the man, in the Lord. 
 
For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; 
but all things of god. 
 
Judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman pray unto God 
uncovered? 
 
Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, 
it is a shame unto him? 
 
But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is 
given her for a covering. 
 
But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither 
the churches of God. 
 
Now in this that I declare unto you I praise you not, that ye come 
together not for the better, but for the worse. 
 
For first of all, when ye come together in the church, I hear that 
there be divisions among you; and I partly believe it. 
 
For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are 
approved may be made manifest among you. 
 
When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the 
Lord's supper. 
 
For in eating every one taketh before other his own supper: and one is 
hungry, and another is drunken. 
 
What? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the 
church of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I say to you? 
shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. 
 
For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, 
That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took 
bread: 
 
And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this 
is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. 
 
After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, 
saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft 
as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. 
 
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the 
Lord's death till he come. 
 
Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the 
Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. 
 
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and 
drink of that cup. 
 
For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh 
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body. 
 
For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. 
 
For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged. 
 
But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should 
not be condemned with the world. 
 
Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for 
another. 
 
And if any man hunger, let him eat at home; that ye come not together 
unto condemnation. And the rest will I set in order when I come. 
 
Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you 
ignorant. 
 
Ye know that ye were Gentiles, carried away unto these dumb idols, 
even as ye were led. 
 
Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit 
of God calleth Jesus accursed: and that no man can say that Jesus is 
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. 
 
Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. 
 
And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord. 
 
And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which 
worketh all in all. 
 
But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit 
withal. 
 
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the 
word of knowledge by the same Spirit; 
 
To another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing 
by the same Spirit; 
 
To another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another 
discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another 
the interpretation of tongues: 
 
But all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to 
every man severally as he will. 
 
For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of 
that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ. 
 
For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be 
Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made 
to drink into one Spirit. 
 
For the body is not one member, but many. 
 
If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the 
body; is it therefore not of the body? 
 
And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the 
body; is it therefore not of the body? 
 
If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole 
were hearing, where were the smelling? 
 
But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it 
hath pleased him. 
 
And if they were all one member, where were the body? 
 
But now are they many members, yet but one body. 
 
And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor 
again the head to the feet, I have no need of you. 
 
Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more 
feeble, are necessary: 
 
And those members of the body, which we think to be less honourable, 
upon these we bestow more abundant honour; and our uncomely parts have 
more abundant comeliness. 
 
For our comely parts have no need: but God hath tempered the body 
together, having given more abundant honour to that part which lacked: 
 
That there should be no schism in the body; but that the members 
should have the same care one for another. 
 
And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one 
member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it. 
 
Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. 
 
And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily 
prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of 
healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. 
 
Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers 
of miracles? 
 
Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all 
interpret? 
 
But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet shew I unto you a more 
excellent way. 
 
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not 
charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. 
 
And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, 
and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove 
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. 
 
And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give 
my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. 
 
Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity 
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, 
 
Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily 
provoked, thinketh no evil; 
 
Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; 
 
Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth 
all things. 
 
Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall 
fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be 
knowledge, it shall vanish away. 
 
For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. 
 
But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part 
shall be done away. 
 
When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I 
thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish 
things. 
 
For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I 
know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known. 
 
And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of 
these is charity. 
 
Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye 
may prophesy. 
 
For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men, but 
unto God: for no man understandeth him; howbeit in the spirit he 
speaketh mysteries. 
 
But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification, and 
exhortation, and comfort. 
 
He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself; but he that 
prophesieth edifieth the church. 
 
I would that ye all spake with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied: 
for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues, 
except he interpret, that the church may receive edifying. 
 
Now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall I 
profit you, except I shall speak to you either by revelation, or by 
knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine? 
 
And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, 
except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known 
what is piped or harped? 
 
For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself 
to the battle? 
 
So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be 
understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak 
into the air. 
 
There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none 
of them is without signification. 
 
Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him 
that speaketh a barbarian, and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian 
unto me. 
 
Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that 
ye may excel to the edifying of the church. 
 
Wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue pray that he may 
interpret. 
 
For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my 
understanding is unfruitful. 
 
What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the 
understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with 
the understanding also. 
 
Else when thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that 
occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, 
seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest? 
 
For thou verily givest thanks well, but the other is not edified. 
 
I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than ye all: 
 
Yet in the church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, 
that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in 
an unknown tongue. 
 
Brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye 
children, but in understanding be men. 
 
In the law it is written, With men of other tongues and other lips 
will I speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not hear 
me, saith the Lord. 
 
Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to 
them that believe not: but prophesying serveth not for them that 
believe not, but for them which believe. 
 
If therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and all 
speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or 
unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad? 
 
But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or one 
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all: 
 
And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling 
down on his face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of 
a truth. 
 
How is it then, brethren? when ye come together, every one of you hath 
a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an 
interpretation. Let all things be done unto edifying. 
 
If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at the 
most by three, and that by course; and let one interpret. 
 
But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the church; 
and let him speak to himself, and to God. 
 
Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. 
 
If any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first 
hold his peace. 
 
For ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be 
comforted. 
 
And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets. 
 
For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all 
churches of the saints. 
 
Let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted 
unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as 
also saith the law. 
 
And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: 
for it is a shame for women to speak in the church. 
 
What? came the word of God out from you? or came it unto you only? 
 
If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him 
acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments 
of the Lord. 
 
But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. 
 
Wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy, and forbid not to speak with 
tongues. 
 
Let all things be done decently and in order. 
 
Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the gospel which I preached 
unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand; 
 
By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached unto 
you, unless ye have believed in vain. 
 
For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how 
that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; 
 
And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according 
to the scriptures: 
 
And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve: 
 
After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of 
whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen 
asleep. 
 
After that, he was seen of James; then of all the apostles. 
 
And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due 
time. 
 
For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an 
apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. 
 
But by the grace of God I am what I am: and his grace which was 
bestowed upon me was not in vain; but I laboured more abundantly than 
they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. 
 
Therefore whether it were I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed. 
 
Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some 
among you that there is no resurrection of the dead? 
 
But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen: 
 
And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith 
is also vain. 
 
Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we have 
testified of God that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if 
so be that the dead rise not. 
 
For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised: 
 
And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your 
sins. 
 
Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished. 
 
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most 
miserable. 
 
But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of 
them that slept. 
 
For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the 
dead. 
 
For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. 
 
But every man in his own order: Christ the firstfruits; afterward they 
that are Christ's at his coming. 
 
Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to 
God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule and all 
authority and power. 
 
For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet. 
 
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. 
 
For he hath put all things under his feet. But when he saith, all 
things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which 
did put all things under him. 
 
And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also 
himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God 
may be all in all. 
 
Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead 
rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead? 
 
And why stand we in jeopardy every hour? 
 
I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I 
die daily. 
 
If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what 
advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink; for to 
morrow we die. 
 
Be not deceived: evil communications corrupt good manners. 
 
Awake to righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge 
of God: I speak this to your shame. 
 
But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body 
do they come? 
 
Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die: 
 
And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, 
but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain: 
 
But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his 
own body. 
 
All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh of 
men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds. 
 
There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory 
of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. 
 
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and 
another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star 
in glory. 
 
So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it 
is raised in incorruption: 
 
It is sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory: it is sown in 
weakness; it is raised in power: 
 
It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is a 
natural body, and there is a spiritual body. 
 
And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul; the 
last Adam was made a quickening spirit. 
 
Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is 
natural; and afterward that which is spiritual. 
 
The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from 
heaven. 
 
As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the 
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. 
 
And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the 
image of the heavenly. 
 
Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the 
kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption. 
 
Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all 
be changed, 
 
In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the 
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and 
we shall be changed. 
 
For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must 
put on immortality. 
 
So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this 
mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass 
the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. 
 
O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? 
 
The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. 
 
But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 
 
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmovable, always 
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your 
labour is not in vain in the Lord. 
 
Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given order to 
the churches of Galatia, even so do ye. 
 
Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in 
store, as God hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I 
come. 
 
And when I come, whomsoever ye shall approve by your letters, them 
will I send to bring your liberality unto Jerusalem. 
 
And if it be meet that I go also, they shall go with me. 
 
Now I will come unto you, when I shall pass through Macedonia: for I 
do pass through Macedonia. 
 
And it may be that I will abide, yea, and winter with you, that ye may 
bring me on my journey whithersoever I go. 
 
For I will not see you now by the way; but I trust to tarry a while 
with you, if the Lord permit. 
 
But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost. 
 
For a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many 
adversaries. 
 
Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear: for 
he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do. 
 
Let no man therefore despise him: but conduct him forth in peace, that 
he may come unto me: for I look for him with the brethren. 
 
As touching our brother Apollos, I greatly desired him to come unto 
you with the brethren: but his will was not at all to come at this 
time; but he will come when he shall have convenient time. 
 
Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong. 
 
Let all your things be done with charity. 
 
I beseech you, brethren, (ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is 
the firstfruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to 
the ministry of the saints,) 
 
That ye submit yourselves unto such, and to every one that helpeth 
with us, and laboureth. 
 
I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus: for 
that which was lacking on your part they have supplied. 
 
For they have refreshed my spirit and yours: therefore acknowledge ye 
them that are such. 
 
The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much 
in the Lord, with the church that is in their house. 
 
All the brethren greet you. Greet ye one another with an holy kiss. 
 
The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand. 
 
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema 
Maranatha. 
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. 
 
My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen. 
 
The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians 
 
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy our 
brother, unto the church of God which is at Corinth, with all the 
saints which are in all Achaia: 
 
Grace be to you and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 
 
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father 
of mercies, and the God of all comfort; 
 
Who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to 
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we 
ourselves are comforted of God. 
 
For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also 
aboundeth by Christ. 
 
And whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, 
which is effectual in the enduring of the same sufferings which we 
also suffer: or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation 
and salvation. 
 
And our hope of you is stedfast, knowing, that as ye are partakers of 
the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation. 
 
For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which 
came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above 
strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life: 
 
But we had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not 
trust in ourselves, but in God which raiseth the dead: 
 
Who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver: in whom we 
trust that he will yet deliver us; 
 
Ye also helping together by prayer for us, that for the gift bestowed 
upon us by the means of many persons thanks may be given by many on 
our behalf. 
 
For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in 
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the 
grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more 
abundantly to you-ward. 
 
For we write none other things unto you, than what ye read or 
acknowledge; and I trust ye shall acknowledge even to the end; 
 
As also ye have acknowledged us in part, that we are your rejoicing, 
even as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus. 
 
And in this confidence I was minded to come unto you before, that ye 
might have a second benefit; 
 
And to pass by you into Macedonia, and to come again out of Macedonia 
unto you, and of you to be brought on my way toward Judaea. 
 
When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightness? or the things 
that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me 
there should be yea yea, and nay nay? 
 
But as God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay. 
 
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, 
even by me and Silvanus and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him 
was yea. 
 
For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the 
glory of God by us. 
 
Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, 
is God; 
 
Who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our 
hearts. 
 
Moreover I call God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I 
came not as yet unto Corinth. 
 
Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your 
joy: for by faith ye stand. 
 
But I determined this with myself, that I would not come again to you 
in heaviness. 
 
For if I make you sorry, who is he then that maketh me glad, but the 
same which is made sorry by me? 
 
And I wrote this same unto you, lest, when I came, I should have 
sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice; having confidence in you 
all, that my joy is the joy of you all. 
 
For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with 
many tears; not that ye should be grieved, but that ye might know the 
love which I have more abundantly unto you. 
 
But if any have caused grief, he hath not grieved me, but in part: 
that I may not overcharge you all. 
 
Sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of 
many. 
 
So that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, 
lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. 
 
Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward him. 
 
For to this end also did I write, that I might know the proof of you, 
whether ye be obedient in all things. 
 
To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: for if I forgave any 
thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it in the person 
of Christ; 
 
Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of 
his devices. 
 
Furthermore, when I came to Troas to preach Christ's gospel, and a 
door was opened unto me of the Lord, 
 
I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother: but 
taking my leave of them, I went from thence into Macedonia. 
 
Now thanks be unto God, which always causeth us to triumph in Christ, 
and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us in every place. 
 
For we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, 
and in them that perish: 
 
To the one we are the savour of death unto death; and to the other the 
savour of life unto life. And who is sufficient for these things? 
 
For we are not as many, which corrupt the word of God: but as of 
sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ. 
 
Do we begin again to commend ourselves? or need we, as some others, 
epistles of commendation to you, or letters of commendation from you? 
 
Ye are our epistle written in our hearts, known and read of all men: 
 
Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ 
ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the 
living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart. 
 
And such trust have we through Christ to God-ward: 
 
Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of 
ourselves; but our sufficiency is of God; 
 
Who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not of the 
letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit 
giveth life. 
 
But if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, was 
glorious, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold 
the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to 
be done away: 
 
How shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious? 
 
For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the 
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. 
 
For even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by 
reason of the glory that excelleth. 
 
For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which 
remaineth is glorious. 
 
Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech: 
 
And not as Moses, which put a vail over his face, that the children of 
Israel could not stedfastly look to the end of that which is 
abolished: 
 
But their minds were blinded: for until this day remaineth the same 
vail untaken away in the reading of the old testament; which vail is 
done away in Christ. 
 
But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their 
heart. 
 
Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken 
away. 
 
Now the Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is, 
there is liberty. 
 
But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the 
Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by 
the Spirit of the Lord. 
 
Therefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy, we 
faint not; 
 
But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in 
craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by 
manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's 
conscience in the sight of God. 
 
But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: 
 
In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which 
believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is 
the image of God, should shine unto them. 
 
For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves 
your servants for Jesus' sake. 
 
For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined 
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God 
in the face of Jesus Christ. 
 
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of 
the power may be of God, and not of us. 
 
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, 
but not in despair; 
 
Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; 
 
Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the 
life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. 
 
For we which live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, that 
the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. 
 
So then death worketh in us, but life in you. 
 
We having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I 
believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore 
speak; 
 
Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also 
by Jesus, and shall present us with you. 
 
For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might 
through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God. 
 
For which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet 
the inward man is renewed day by day. 
 
For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; 
 
While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things 
which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but 
the things which are not seen are eternal. 
 
For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were 
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, 
eternal in the heavens. 
 
For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our 
house which is from heaven: 
 
If so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked. 
 
For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not for 
that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be 
swallowed up of life. 
 
Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who also 
hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. 
 
Therefore we are always confident, knowing that, whilst we are at home 
in the body, we are absent from the Lord: 
 
(For we walk by faith, not by sight:) 
 
We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the 
body, and to be present with the Lord. 
 
Wherefore we labour, that, whether present or absent, we may be 
accepted of him. 
 
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every 
one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath 
done, whether it be good or bad. 
 
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men; but we are 
made manifest unto God; and I trust also are made manifest in your 
consciences. 
 
For we commend not ourselves again unto you, but give you occasion to 
glory on our behalf, that ye may have somewhat to answer them which 
glory in appearance, and not in heart. 
 
For whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God: or whether we be 
sober, it is for your cause. 
 
For the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that if 
one died for all, then were all dead: 
 
And that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth 
live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose 
again. 
 
Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, though we 
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no 
more. 
 
Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things 
are passed away; behold, all things are become new. 
 
And all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus 
Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation; 
 
To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, 
not imputing their trespasses unto them; and hath committed unto us 
the word of reconciliation. 
 
Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you 
by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. 
 
For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might 
be made the righteousness of God in him. 
 
We then, as workers together with him, beseech you also that ye 
receive not the grace of God in vain. 
 
(For he saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of 
salvation have I succoured thee: behold, now is the accepted time; 
behold, now is the day of salvation.) 
 
Giving no offence in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed: 
 
But in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much 
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, 
 
In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in 
fastings; 
 
By pureness, by knowledge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy 
Ghost, by love unfeigned, 
 
By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armour of 
righteousness on the right hand and on the left, 
 
By honour and dishonour, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, 
and yet true; 
 
As unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and, behold, we live; as 
chastened, and not killed; 
 
As sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as 
having nothing, and yet possessing all things. 
 
O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged. 
 
Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your own bowels. 
 
Now for a recompence in the same, (I speak as unto my children,) be ye 
also enlarged. 
 
Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what 
fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion 
hath light with darkness? 
 
And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that 
believeth with an infidel? 
 
And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? for ye are the 
temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and 
walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. 
 
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the 
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, 
 
And will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, 
saith the Lord Almighty. 
 
Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse 
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting 
holiness in the fear of God. 
 
Receive us; we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have 
defrauded no man. 
 
I speak not this to condemn you: for I have said before, that ye are 
in our hearts to die and live with you. 
 
Great is my boldness of speech toward you, great is my glorying of 
you: I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our 
tribulation. 
 
For, when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we 
were troubled on every side; without were fightings, within were 
fears. 
 
Nevertheless God, that comforteth those that are cast down, comforted 
us by the coming of Titus; 
 
And not by his coming only, but by the consolation wherewith he was 
comforted in you, when he told us your earnest desire, your mourning, 
your fervent mind toward me; so that I rejoiced the more. 
 
For though I made you sorry with a letter, I do not repent, though I 
did repent: for I perceive that the same epistle hath made you sorry, 
though it were but for a season. 
 
Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to 
repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might 
receive damage by us in nothing. 
 
For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented 
of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death. 
 
For behold this selfsame thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, 
what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves, 
yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, 
what zeal, yea, what revenge! In all things ye have approved 
yourselves to be clear in this matter. 
 
Wherefore, though I wrote unto you, I did it not for his cause that 
had done the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered wrong, but that 
our care for you in the sight of God might appear unto you. 
 
Therefore we were comforted in your comfort: yea, and exceedingly the 
more joyed we for the joy of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed 
by you all. 
 
For if I have boasted any thing to him of you, I am not ashamed; but 
as we spake all things to you in truth, even so our boasting, which I 
made before Titus, is found a truth. 
 
And his inward affection is more abundant toward you, whilst he 
remembereth the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye 
received him. 
 
I rejoice therefore that I have confidence in you in all things. 
 
Moreover, brethren, we do you to wit of the grace of God bestowed on 
the churches of Macedonia; 
 
How that in a great trial of affliction the abundance of their joy and 
their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their liberality. 
 
For to their power, I bear record, yea, and beyond their power they 
were willing of themselves; 
 
Praying us with much intreaty that we would receive the gift, and take 
upon us the fellowship of the ministering to the saints. 
 
And this they did, not as we hoped, but first gave their own selves to 
the Lord, and unto us by the will of God. 
 
Insomuch that we desired Titus, that as he had begun, so he would also 
finish in you the same grace also. 
 
Therefore, as ye abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance, and 
knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to us, see that ye 
abound in this grace also. 
 
I speak not by commandment, but by occasion of the forwardness of 
others, and to prove the sincerity of your love. 
 
For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was 
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty 
might be rich. 
 
And herein I give my advice: for this is expedient for you, who have 
begun before, not only to do, but also to be forward a year ago. 
 
Now therefore perform the doing of it; that as there was a readiness 
to will, so there may be a performance also out of that which ye have. 
 
For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that 
a man hath, and not according to that he hath not. 
 
For I mean not that other men be eased, and ye burdened: 
 
But by an equality, that now at this time your abundance may be a 
supply for their want, that their abundance also may be a supply for 
your want: that there may be equality: 
 
As it is written, He that had gathered much had nothing over; and he 
that had gathered little had no lack. 
 
But thanks be to God, which put the same earnest care into the heart 
of Titus for you. 
 
For indeed he accepted the exhortation; but being more forward, of his 
own accord he went unto you. 
 
And we have sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the gospel 
throughout all the churches; 
 
And not that only, but who was also chosen of the churches to travel 
with us with this grace, which is administered by us to the glory of 
the same Lord, and declaration of your ready mind: 
 
Avoiding this, that no man should blame us in this abundance which is 
administered by us: 
 
Providing for honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but 
also in the sight of men. 
 
And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have oftentimes proved 
diligent in many things, but now much more diligent, upon the great 
confidence which I have in you. 
 
Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellowhelper 
concerning you: or our brethren be enquired of, they are the 
messengers of the churches, and the glory of Christ. 
 
Wherefore shew ye to them, and before the churches, the proof of your 
love, and of our boasting on your behalf. 
 
For as touching the ministering to the saints, it is superfluous for 
me to write to you: 
 
For I know the forwardness of your mind, for which I boast of you to 
them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago; and your zeal 
hath provoked very many. 
 
Yet have I sent the brethren, lest our boasting of you should be in 
vain in this behalf; that, as I said, ye may be ready: 
 
Lest haply if they of Macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared, 
we (that we say not, ye) should be ashamed in this same confident 
boasting. 
 
Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren, that they 
would go before unto you, and make up beforehand your bounty, whereof 
ye had notice before, that the same might be ready, as a matter of 
bounty, and not as of covetousness. 
 
But this I say, He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; 
and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully. 
 
Every man according as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; not 
grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loveth a cheerful giver. 
 
And God is able to make all grace abound toward you; that ye, always 
having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work: 
 
(As it is written, He hath dispersed abroad; he hath given to the 
poor: his righteousness remaineth for ever. 
 
Now he that ministereth seed to the sower both minister bread for your 
food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your 
righteousness;) 
 
Being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness, which causeth 
through us thanksgiving to God. 
 
For the administration of this service not only supplieth the want of 
the saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God; 
 
Whiles by the experiment of this ministration they glorify God for 
your professed subjection into the gospel of Christ, and for your 
liberal distribution unto them, and unto all men; 
 
And by their prayer for you, which long after you for the exceeding 
grace of God in you. 
 
Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift. 
 
Now I Paul myself beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of 
Christ, who in presence am base among you, but being absent am bold 
toward you: 
 
But I beseech you, that I may not be bold when I am present with that 
confidence, wherewith I think to be bold against some, which think of 
us as if we walked according to the flesh. 
 
For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh: 
 
(For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God 
to the pulling down of strong holds;) 
 
Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself 
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every 
thought to the obedience of Christ; 
 
And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your 
obedience is fulfilled. 
 
Do ye look on things after the outward appearance? If any man trust to 
himself that he is Christ's, let him of himself think this again, 
that, as he is Christ's, even so are we Christ's. 
 
For though I should boast somewhat more of our authority, which the 
Lord hath given us for edification, and not for your destruction, I 
should not be ashamed: 
 
That I may not seem as if I would terrify you by letters. 
 
For his letters, say they, are weighty and powerful; but his bodily 
presence is weak, and his speech contemptible. 
 
Let such an one think this, that, such as we are in word by letters 
when we are absent, such will we be also in deed when we are present. 
 
For we dare not make ourselves of the number, or compare ourselves 
with some that commend themselves: but they measuring themselves by 
themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, are not wise. 
 
But we will not boast of things without our measure, but according to 
the measure of the rule which God hath distributed to us, a measure to 
reach even unto you. 
 
For we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure, as though we reached 
not unto you: for we are come as far as to you also in preaching the 
gospel of Christ: 
 
Not boasting of things without our measure, that is, of other men's 
labours; but having hope, when your faith is increased, that we shall 
be enlarged by you according to our rule abundantly, 
 
To preach the gospel in the regions beyond you, and not to boast in 
another man's line of things made ready to our hand. 
 
But he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. 
 
For not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom the Lord 
commendeth. 
 
Would to God ye could bear with me a little in my folly: and indeed 
bear with me. 
 
For I am jealous over you with godly jealousy: for I have espoused you 
to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. 
 
But I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his 
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that 
is in Christ. 
 
For if he that cometh preacheth another Jesus, whom we have not 
preached, or if ye receive another spirit, which ye have not received, 
or another gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with 
him. 
 
For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles. 
 
But though I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge; but we have been 
throughly made manifest among you in all things. 
 
Have I committed an offence in abasing myself that ye might be 
exalted, because I have preached to you the gospel of God freely? 
 
I robbed other churches, taking wages of them, to do you service. 
 
And when I was present with you, and wanted, I was chargeable to no 
man: for that which was lacking to me the brethren which came from 
Macedonia supplied: and in all things I have kept myself from being 
burdensome unto you, and so will I keep myself. 
 
As the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this boasting 
in the regions of Achaia. 
 
Wherefore? because I love you not? God knoweth. 
 
But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them 
which desire occasion; that wherein they glory, they may be found even 
as we. 
 
For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming 
themselves into the apostles of Christ. 
 
And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of 
light. 
 
Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as 
the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their 
works. 
 
I say again, Let no man think me a fool; if otherwise, yet as a fool 
receive me, that I may boast myself a little. 
 
That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but as it were 
foolishly, in this confidence of boasting. 
 
Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also. 
 
For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves are wise. 
 
For ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, 
if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on 
the face. 
 
I speak as concerning reproach, as though we had been weak. Howbeit 
whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak foolishly,) I am bold also. 
 
Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the 
seed of Abraham? so am I. 
 
Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more; in 
labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more 
frequent, in deaths oft. 
 
Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. 
 
Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered 
shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep; 
 
In journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in 
perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in 
the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils 
among false brethren; 
 
In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and 
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. 
 
Beside those things that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, 
the care of all the churches. 
 
Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? 
 
If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern mine 
infirmities. 
 
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for 
evermore, knoweth that I lie not. 
 
In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king kept the city of the 
Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me: 
 
And through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall, and 
escaped his hands. 
 
It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory. I will come to visions 
and revelations of the Lord. 
 
I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, 
I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God 
knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third heaven. 
 
And I knew such a man, (whether in the body, or out of the body, I 
cannot tell: God knoweth;) 
 
How that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, 
which it is not lawful for a man to utter. 
 
Of such an one will I glory: yet of myself I will not glory, but in 
mine infirmities. 
 
For though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool; for I will 
say the truth: but now I forbear, lest any man should think of me 
above that which he seeth me to be, or that he heareth of me. 
 
And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of 
the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the 
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above 
measure. 
 
For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from 
me. 
 
And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength 
is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory 
in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. 
 
Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in 
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: for 
when I am weak, then am I strong. 
 
I am become a fool in glorying; ye have compelled me: for I ought to 
have been commended of you: for in nothing am I behind the very 
chiefest apostles, though I be nothing. 
 
Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all patience, 
in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds. 
 
For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches, except it 
be that I myself was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong. 
 
Behold, the third time I am ready to come to you; and I will not be 
burdensome to you: for I seek not yours, but you: for the children 
ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children. 
 
And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you; though the more 
abundantly I love you, the less I be loved. 
 
But be it so, I did not burden you: nevertheless, being crafty, I 
caught you with guile. 
 
Did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I sent unto you? 
 
I desired Titus, and with him I sent a brother. Did Titus make a gain 
of you? walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not in the same 
steps? 
 
Again, think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you? we speak before God 
in Christ: but we do all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying. 
 
For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, 
and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest there be 
debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, 
swellings, tumults: 
 
And lest, when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and that 
I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented 
of the uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they have 
committed. 
 
This is the third time I am coming to you. In the mouth of two or 
three witnesses shall every word be established. 
 
I told you before, and foretell you, as if I were present, the second 
time; and being absent now I write to them which heretofore have 
sinned, and to all other, that, if I come again, I will not spare: 
 
Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, which to you-ward is 
not weak, but is mighty in you. 
 
For though he was crucified through weakness, yet he liveth by the 
power of God. For we also are weak in him, but we shall live with him 
by the power of God toward you. 
 
Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves. 
Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except 
ye be reprobates? 
 
But I trust that ye shall know that we are not reprobates. 
 
Now I pray to God that ye do no evil; not that we should appear 
approved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as 
reprobates. 
 
For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. 
 
For we are glad, when we are weak, and ye are strong: and this also we 
wish, even your perfection. 
 
Therefore I write these things being absent, lest being present I 
should use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord hath given 
me to edification, and not to destruction. 
 
Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one 
mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you. 
 
Greet one another with an holy kiss. 
 
All the saints salute you. 
 
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the 
communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen. 
 
The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Galatians 
 
Paul, an apostle, (not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, 
and God the Father, who raised him from the dead;) 
 
And all the brethren which are with me, unto the churches of Galatia: 
 
Grace be to you and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus 
Christ, 
 
Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this 
present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father: 
 
To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
 
I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the 
grace of Christ unto another gospel: 
 
Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would 
pervert the gospel of Christ. 
 
But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto 
you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. 
 
As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other 
gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed. 
 
For do I now persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if 
I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. 
 
But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me 
is not after man. 
 
For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the 
revelation of Jesus Christ. 
 
For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews' 
religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and 
wasted it: 
 
And profited in the Jews' religion above many my equals in mine own 
nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my 
fathers. 
 
But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and 
called me by his grace, 
 
To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen; 
immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood: 
 
Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles before me; 
but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. 
 
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode 
with him fifteen days. 
 
But other of the apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's brother. 
 
Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not. 
 
Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia; 
 
And was unknown by face unto the churches of Judaea which were in 
Christ: 
 
But they had heard only, That he which persecuted us in times past now 
preacheth the faith which once he destroyed. 
 
And they glorified God in me. 
 
Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, 
and took Titus with me also. 
 
And I went up by revelation, and communicated unto them that gospel 
which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to them which were of 
reputation, lest by any means I should run, or had run, in vain. 
 
But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be 
circumcised: 
 
And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in 
privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that 
they might bring us into bondage: 
 
To whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour; that the 
truth of the gospel might continue with you. 
 
But of these who seemed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it 
maketh no matter to me: God accepteth no man's person:) for they who 
seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to me: 
 
But contrariwise, when they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcision 
was committed unto me, as the gospel of the circumcision was unto 
Peter; 
 
(For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the apostleship of the 
circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles:) 
 
And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived 
the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the 
right hands of fellowship; that we should go unto the heathen, and 
they unto the circumcision. 
 
Only they would that we should remember the poor; the same which I 
also was forward to do. 
 
But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, 
because he was to be blamed. 
 
For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles: 
but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing 
them which were of the circumcision. 
 
And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that 
Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation. 
 
But when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth 
of the gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a 
Jew, livest after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why 
compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? 
 
We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, 
 
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by 
the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that 
we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of 
the law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. 
 
But if, while we seek to be justified by Christ, we ourselves also are 
found sinners, is therefore Christ the minister of sin? God forbid. 
 
For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make myself a 
transgressor. 
 
For I through the law am dead to the law, that I might live unto God. 
 
I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ 
liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the 
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. 
 
I do not frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousness come by the 
law, then Christ is dead in vain. 
 
O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey 
the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set 
forth, crucified among you? 
 
This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of 
the law, or by the hearing of faith? 
 
Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect 
by the flesh? 
 
Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain. 
 
He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit, and worketh miracles 
among you, doeth he it by the works of the law, or by the hearing of 
faith? 
 
Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for 
righteousness. 
 
Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the 
children of Abraham. 
 
And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen 
through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In 
thee shall all nations be blessed. 
 
So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. 
 
For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse: for it 
is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things 
which are written in the book of the law to do them. 
 
But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is 
evident: for, The just shall live by faith. 
 
And the law is not of faith: but, The man that doeth them shall live 
in them. 
 
Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse 
for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree: 
 
That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus 
Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. 
 
Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; Though it be but a man's 
covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or addeth 
thereto. 
 
Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, And 
to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ. 
 
And this I say, that the covenant, that was confirmed before of God in 
Christ, the law, which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot 
disannul, that it should make the promise of none effect. 
 
For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise: but 
God gave it to Abraham by promise. 
 
Wherefore then serveth the law? It was added because of 
transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was 
made; and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator. 
 
Now a mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one. 
 
Is the law then against the promises of God? God forbid: for if there 
had been a law given which could have given life, verily righteousness 
should have been by the law. 
 
But the scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by 
faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. 
 
But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the 
faith which should afterwards be revealed. 
 
Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that 
we might be justified by faith. 
 
But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. 
 
For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. 
 
For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on 
Christ. 
 
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there 
is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. 
 
And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according 
to the promise. 
 
Now I say, That the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth nothing 
from a servant, though he be lord of all; 
 
But is under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the 
father. 
 
Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the elements 
of the world: 
 
But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, 
made of a woman, made under the law, 
 
To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the 
adoption of sons. 
 
And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son 
into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. 
 
Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an 
heir of God through Christ. 
 
Howbeit then, when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by 
nature are no gods. 
 
But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how 
turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire 
again to be in bondage? 
 
Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years. 
 
I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain. 
 
Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am as ye are: ye have not 
injured me at all. 
 
Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel unto 
you at the first. 
 
And my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; 
but received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. 
 
Where is then the blessedness ye spake of? for I bear you record, 
that, if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own 
eyes, and have given them to me. 
 
Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? 
 
They zealously affect you, but not well; yea, they would exclude you, 
that ye might affect them. 
 
But it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, and 
not only when I am present with you. 
 
My little children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be 
formed in you, 
 
I desire to be present with you now, and to change my voice; for I 
stand in doubt of you. 
 
Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law? 
 
For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, 
the other by a freewoman. 
 
But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he of 
the freewoman was by promise. 
 
Which things are an allegory: for these are the two covenants; the one 
from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar. 
 
For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem 
which now is, and is in bondage with her children. 
 
But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all. 
 
For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break forth 
and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many more 
children than she which hath an husband. 
 
Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise. 
 
But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was 
born after the Spirit, even so it is now. 
 
Nevertheless what saith the scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her 
son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of 
the free woman. 
 
So then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the 
free. 
 
Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us 
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. 
 
Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall 
profit you nothing. 
 
For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a 
debtor to do the whole law. 
 
Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified 
by the law; ye are fallen from grace. 
 
For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. 
 
For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor 
uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love. 
 
Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth? 
 
This persuasion cometh not of him that calleth you. 
 
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. 
 
I have confidence in you through the Lord, that ye will be none 
otherwise minded: but he that troubleth you shall bear his judgment, 
whosoever he be. 
 
And I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer 
persecution? then is the offence of the cross ceased. 
 
I would they were even cut off which trouble you. 
 
For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not liberty 
for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. 
 
For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself. 
 
But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not 
consumed one of another. 
 
This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust 
of the flesh. 
 
For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the 
flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot 
do the things that ye would. 
 
But if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law. 
 
Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, 
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 
 
Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, 
seditions, heresies, 
 
Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the 
which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that 
they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 
 
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, 
gentleness, goodness, faith, 
 
Meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. 
 
And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the 
affections and lusts. 
 
If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. 
 
Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying 
one another. 
 
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, 
restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, 
lest thou also be tempted. 
 
Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ. 
 
For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he 
deceiveth himself. 
 
But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing 
in himself alone, and not in another. 
 
For every man shall bear his own burden. 
 
Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teacheth 
in all good things. 
 
Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that 
shall he also reap. 
 
For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; 
but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life 
everlasting. 
 
And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall 
reap, if we faint not. 
 
As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, 
especially unto them who are of the household of faith. 
 
Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand. 
 
As many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh, they constrain you 
to be circumcised; only lest they should suffer persecution for the 
cross of Christ. 
 
For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the law; but 
desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh. 
 
But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the 
world. 
 
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor 
uncircumcision, but a new creature. 
 
And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and 
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. 
 
From henceforth let no man trouble me: for I bear in my body the marks 
of the Lord Jesus. 
 
Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. 
Amen. 
 
The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians 
 
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the saints 
which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus: 
 
Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 
 
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath 
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: 
 
According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the 
world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: 
 
Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ 
to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, 
 
To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us 
accepted in the beloved. 
 
In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, 
according to the riches of his grace; 
 
Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence; 
 
Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his 
good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself: 
 
That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather 
together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and 
which are on earth; even in him: 
 
In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated 
according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the 
counsel of his own will: 
 
That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in 
Christ. 
 
In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the 
gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were 
sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, 
 
Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the 
purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory. 
 
Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and 
love unto all the saints, 
 
Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers; 
 
That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give 
unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: 
 
The eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know 
what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of 
his inheritance in the saints, 
 
And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who 
believe, according to the working of his mighty power, 
 
Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set 
him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, 
 
Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and 
every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that 
which is to come: 
 
And hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head 
over all things to the church, 
 
Which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all. 
 
And you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins; 
 
Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world, 
according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now 
worketh in the children of disobedience: 
 
Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past in the lusts 
of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind; and 
were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. 
 
But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved 
us, 
 
Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with 
Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) 
 
And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly 
places in Christ Jesus: 
 
That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his 
grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. 
 
For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: 
it is the gift of God: 
 
Not of works, lest any man should boast. 
 
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, 
which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them. 
 
Wherefore remember, that ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, 
who are called Uncircumcision by that which is called the Circumcision 
in the flesh made by hands; 
 
That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the 
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, 
having no hope, and without God in the world: 
 
But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off are made nigh by 
the blood of Christ. 
 
For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the 
middle wall of partition between us; 
 
Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments 
contained in ordinances; for to make in himself of twain one new man, 
so making peace; 
 
And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, 
having slain the enmity thereby: 
 
And came and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them 
that were nigh. 
 
For through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father. 
 
Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but 
fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God; 
 
And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus 
Christ himself being the chief corner stone; 
 
In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy 
temple in the Lord: 
 
In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through 
the Spirit. 
 
For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles, 
 
If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which is 
given me to youward: 
 
How that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery; (as I wrote 
afore in few words, 
 
Whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery 
of Christ) 
 
Which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is 
now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit; 
 
That the Gentiles should be fellowheirs, and of the same body, and 
partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel: 
 
Whereof I was made a minister, according to the gift of the grace of 
God given unto me by the effectual working of his power. 
 
Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace 
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches 
of Christ; 
 
And to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which 
from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God, who created all 
things by Jesus Christ: 
 
To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly 
places might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God, 
 
According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our 
Lord: 
 
In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of 
him. 
 
Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for you, which 
is your glory. 
 
For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, 
 
Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, 
 
That he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be 
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man; 
 
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted 
and grounded in love, 
 
May be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and 
length, and depth, and height; 
 
And to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might 
be filled with all the fulness of God. 
 
Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we 
ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, 
 
Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, 
world without end. Amen. 
 
I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy 
of the vocation wherewith ye are called, 
 
With all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one 
another in love; 
 
Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. 
 
There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope 
of your calling; 
 
One Lord, one faith, one baptism, 
 
One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in 
you all. 
 
But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of 
the gift of Christ. 
 
Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity 
captive, and gave gifts unto men. 
 
(Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first 
into the lower parts of the earth? 
 
He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all 
heavens, that he might fill all things.) 
 
And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; 
and some, pastors and teachers; 
 
For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for 
the edifying of the body of Christ: 
 
Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of 
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of 
the fulness of Christ: 
 
That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried 
about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning 
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; 
 
But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, 
which is the head, even Christ: 
 
From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that 
which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the 
measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying 
of itself in love. 
 
This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk 
not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, 
 
Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of 
God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of 
their heart: 
 
Who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, 
to work all uncleanness with greediness. 
 
But ye have not so learned Christ; 
 
If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the 
truth is in Jesus: 
 
That ye put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which 
is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; 
 
And be renewed in the spirit of your mind; 
 
And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in 
righteousness and true holiness. 
 
Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his 
neighbour: for we are members one of another. 
 
Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath: 
 
Neither give place to the devil. 
 
Let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him labour, working 
with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to 
him that needeth. 
 
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which 
is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the 
hearers. 
 
And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the 
day of redemption. 
 
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil 
speaking, be put away from you, with all malice: 
 
And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, 
even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you. 
 
Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children; 
 
And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself 
for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweetsmelling savour. 
 
But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be 
once named among you, as becometh saints; 
 
Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not 
convenient: but rather giving of thanks. 
 
For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor 
covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom 
of Christ and of God. 
 
Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things 
cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. 
 
Be not ye therefore partakers with them. 
 
For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk 
as children of light: 
 
(For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and 
truth;) 
 
Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord. 
 
And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but 
rather reprove them. 
 
For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them 
in secret. 
 
But all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light: for 
whatsoever doth make manifest is light. 
 
Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, 
and Christ shall give thee light. 
 
See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, 
 
Redeeming the time, because the days are evil. 
 
Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the 
Lord is. 
 
And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the 
Spirit; 
 
Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, 
singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord; 
 
Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father in the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ; 
 
Submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God. 
 
Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. 
 
For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of 
the church: and he is the saviour of the body. 
 
Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to 
their own husbands in every thing. 
 
Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and 
gave himself for it; 
 
That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the 
word, 
 
That he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having 
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and 
without blemish. 
 
So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth 
his wife loveth himself. 
 
For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth 
it, even as the Lord the church: 
 
For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. 
 
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be 
joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. 
 
This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the church. 
 
Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife even 
as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband. 
 
Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right. 
 
Honour thy father and mother; (which is the first commandment with 
promise;) 
 
That it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth. 
 
And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up 
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. 
 
Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the 
flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto 
Christ; 
 
Not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the servants of Christ, 
doing the will of God from the heart; 
 
With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men: 
 
Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall he 
receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. 
 
And, ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening: 
knowing that your Master also is in heaven; neither is there respect 
of persons with him. 
 
Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his 
might. 
 
Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against 
the wiles of the devil. 
 
For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against 
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of 
this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able 
to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. 
 
Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having 
on the breastplate of righteousness; 
 
And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; 
 
Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to 
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. 
 
And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which 
is the word of God: 
 
Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and 
watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all 
saints; 
 
And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my 
mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel, 
 
For which I am an ambassador in bonds: that therein I may speak 
boldly, as I ought to speak. 
 
But that ye also may know my affairs, and how I do, Tychicus, a 
beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to 
you all things: 
 
Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that ye might know our 
affairs, and that he might comfort your hearts. 
 
Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 
 
Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. 
Amen. 
 
The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Philippians 
 
Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in 
Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons: 
 
Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 
 
I thank my God upon every remembrance of you, 
 
Always in every prayer of mine for you all making request with joy, 
 
For your fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now; 
 
Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good 
work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ: 
 
Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have you 
in my heart; inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the defence and 
confirmation of the gospel, ye all are partakers of my grace. 
 
For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels 
of Jesus Christ. 
 
And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in 
knowledge and in all judgment; 
 
That ye may approve things that are excellent; that ye may be sincere 
and without offence till the day of Christ; 
 
Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus 
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. 
 
But I would ye should understand, brethren, that the things which 
happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the 
gospel; 
 
So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and in all 
other places; 
 
And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, 
are much more bold to speak the word without fear. 
 
Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife; and some also of 
good will: 
 
The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add 
affliction to my bonds: 
 
But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defence of the 
gospel. 
 
What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence, or in 
truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will 
rejoice. 
 
For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, 
and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, 
 
According to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in nothing I 
shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also 
Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by 
death. 
 
For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. 
 
But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labour: yet what I 
shall choose I wot not. 
 
For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be 
with Christ; which is far better: 
 
Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. 
 
And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue 
with you all for your furtherance and joy of faith; 
 
That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me by my 
coming to you again. 
 
Only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ: 
that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your 
affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving 
together for the faith of the gospel; 
 
And in nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is to them an 
evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. 
 
For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe 
on him, but also to suffer for his sake; 
 
Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me. 
 
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of 
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, 
 
Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same love, being 
of one accord, of one mind. 
 
Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of 
mind let each esteem other better than themselves. 
 
Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things 
of others. 
 
Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: 
 
Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with 
God: 
 
But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a 
servant, and was made in the likeness of men: 
 
And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became 
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
 
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which 
is above every name: 
 
That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, 
and things in earth, and things under the earth; 
 
And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the 
glory of God the Father. 
 
Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence 
only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation 
with fear and trembling. 
 
For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good 
pleasure. 
 
Do all things without murmurings and disputings: 
 
That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without 
rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye 
shine as lights in the world; 
 
Holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice in the day of 
Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain. 
 
Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, 
I joy, and rejoice with you all. 
 
For the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me. 
 
But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that 
I also may be of good comfort, when I know your state. 
 
For I have no man likeminded, who will naturally care for your state. 
 
For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. 
 
But ye know the proof of him, that, as a son with the father, he hath 
served with me in the gospel. 
 
Him therefore I hope to send presently, so soon as I shall see how it 
will go with me. 
 
But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come shortly. 
 
Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, 
and companion in labour, and fellow soldier, but your messenger, and 
he that ministered to my wants. 
 
For he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because that 
ye had heard that he had been sick. 
 
For indeed he was sick nigh unto death: but God had mercy on him; and 
not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon 
sorrow. 
 
I sent him therefore the more carefully, that, when ye see him again, 
ye may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful. 
 
Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness; and hold such in 
reputation: 
 
Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not regarding 
his life, to supply your lack of service toward me. 
 
Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to 
you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe. 
 
Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. 
 
For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and 
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. 
 
Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other man 
thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more: 
 
Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of 
Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee; 
 
Concerning zeal, persecuting the church; touching the righteousness 
which is in the law, blameless. 
 
But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. 
 
Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of 
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the 
loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, 
 
And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of 
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the 
righteousness which is of God by faith: 
 
That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the 
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; 
 
If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead. 
 
Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect: but 
I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am 
apprehended of Christ Jesus. 
 
Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I 
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto 
those things which are before, 
 
I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in 
Christ Jesus. 
 
Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any 
thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. 
 
Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the 
same rule, let us mind the same thing. 
 
Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as 
ye have us for an ensample. 
 
(For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even 
weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: 
 
Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is 
in their shame, who mind earthly things.) 
 
For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the 
Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: 
 
Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his 
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to 
subdue all things unto himself. 
 
Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and 
crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved. 
 
I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that they be of the same mind 
in the Lord. 
 
And I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which 
laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and with other my 
fellowlabourers, whose names are in the book of life. 
 
Rejoice in the Lord alway: and again I say, Rejoice. 
 
Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand. 
 
Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication 
with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God. 
 
And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your 
hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. 
 
Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are 
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, 
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if 
there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these 
things. 
 
Those things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and 
seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you. 
 
But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care of 
me hath flourished again; wherein ye were also careful, but ye lacked 
opportunity. 
 
Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned, in whatsoever 
state I am, therewith to be content. 
 
I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where 
and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, 
both to abound and to suffer need. 
 
I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me. 
 
Notwithstanding ye have well done, that ye did communicate with my 
affliction. 
 
Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the gospel, 
when I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated with me as 
concerning giving and receiving, but ye only. 
 
For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessity. 
 
Not because I desire a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound to 
your account. 
 
But I have all, and abound: I am full, having received of Epaphroditus 
the things which were sent from you, an odour of a sweet smell, a 
sacrifice acceptable, wellpleasing to God. 
 
But my God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory 
by Christ Jesus. 
 
Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
 
Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are with me 
greet you. 
 
All the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar's 
household. 
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. 
 
The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Colossians 
 
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timotheus our 
brother, 
 
To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colosse: 
Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 
 
We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying 
always for you, 
 
Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye 
have to all the saints, 
 
For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard 
before in the word of the truth of the gospel; 
 
Which is come unto you, as it is in all the world; and bringeth forth 
fruit, as it doth also in you, since the day ye heard of it, and knew 
the grace of God in truth: 
 
As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellowservant, who is for you 
a faithful minister of Christ; 
 
Who also declared unto us your love in the Spirit. 
 
For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to 
pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge 
of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding; 
 
That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being 
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God; 
 
Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all 
patience and longsuffering with joyfulness; 
 
Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers 
of the inheritance of the saints in light: 
 
Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated 
us into the kingdom of his dear Son: 
 
In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of 
sins: 
 
Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every 
creature: 
 
For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are 
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or 
dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by 
him, and for him: 
 
And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. 
 
And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the 
firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the 
preeminence. 
 
For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell; 
 
And, having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to 
reconcile all things unto himself; by him, I say, whether they be 
things in earth, or things in heaven. 
 
And you, that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by 
wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled 
 
In the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and 
unblameable and unreproveable in his sight: 
 
If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved 
away from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which was 
preached to every creature which is under heaven; whereof I Paul am 
made a minister; 
 
Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, 
which is the church: 
 
Whereof I am made a minister, according to the dispensation of God 
which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of God; 
 
Even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, 
but now is made manifest to his saints: 
 
To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this 
mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory: 
 
Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all 
wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus: 
 
Whereunto I also labour, striving according to his working, which 
worketh in me mightily. 
 
For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and for 
them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the 
flesh; 
 
That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and 
unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the 
acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of 
Christ; 
 
In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. 
 
And this I say, lest any man should beguile you with enticing words. 
 
For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, 
joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in 
Christ. 
 
As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in 
him: 
 
Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have 
been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. 
 
Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, 
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not 
after Christ. 
 
For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. 
 
And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principality and 
power: 
 
In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without 
hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the 
circumcision of Christ: 
 
Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through 
the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead. 
 
And you, being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh, 
hath he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all 
trespasses; 
 
Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which 
was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his 
cross; 
 
And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a shew of them 
openly, triumphing over them in it. 
 
Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of 
an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days: 
 
Which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ. 
 
Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and 
worshipping of angels, intruding into those things which he hath not 
seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, 
 
And not holding the Head, from which all the body by joints and bands 
having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the 
increase of God. 
 
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, 
why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances, 
 
(Touch not; taste not; handle not; 
 
Which all are to perish with the using;) after the commandments and 
doctrines of men? 
 
Which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will worship, and 
humility, and neglecting of the body; not in any honour to the 
satisfying of the flesh. 
 
If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, 
where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. 
 
Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth. 
 
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. 
 
When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear 
with him in glory. 
 
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication, 
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and 
covetousness, which is idolatry: 
 
For which things' sake the wrath of God cometh on the children of 
disobedience: 
 
In the which ye also walked some time, when ye lived in them. 
 
But now ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, 
filthy communication out of your mouth. 
 
Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with 
his deeds; 
 
And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the 
image of him that created him: 
 
Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, 
Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in all. 
 
Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of 
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering; 
 
Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a 
quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. 
 
And above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of 
perfectness. 
 
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are 
called in one body; and be ye thankful. 
 
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and 
admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, 
singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. 
 
And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord 
Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him. 
 
Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in the 
Lord. 
 
Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them. 
 
Children, obey your parents in all things: for this is well pleasing 
unto the Lord. 
 
Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged. 
 
Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh; not 
with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but in singleness of heart, fearing 
God: 
 
And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto 
men; 
 
Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the 
inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. 
 
But he that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong which he hath 
done: and there is no respect of persons. 
 
Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal; knowing 
that ye also have a Master in heaven. 
 
Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving; 
 
Withal praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of 
utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in 
bonds: 
 
That I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak. 
 
Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time. 
 
Let your speech be alway with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may 
know how ye ought to answer every man. 
 
All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved 
brother, and a faithful minister and fellowservant in the Lord: 
 
Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know 
your estate, and comfort your hearts; 
 
With Onesimus, a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They 
shall make known unto you all things which are done here. 
 
Aristarchus my fellowprisoner saluteth you, and Marcus, sister's son 
to Barnabas, (touching whom ye received commandments: if he come unto 
you, receive him;) 
 
And Jesus, which is called Justus, who are of the circumcision. These 
only are my fellow workers unto the kingdom of God, which have been a 
comfort unto me. 
 
Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you, always 
labouring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and 
complete in all the will of God. 
 
For I bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, and them 
that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis. 
 
Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas, greet you. 
 
Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the church 
which is in his house. 
 
And when this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in 
the church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle 
from Laodicea. 
 
And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou hast 
received in the Lord, that thou fulfil it. 
 
The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bonds. Grace be 
with you. Amen. 
 
The First Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians 
 
Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the 
Thessalonians which is in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ: 
Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 
 
We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our 
prayers; 
 
Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labour of love, 
and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and 
our Father; 
 
Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God. 
 
For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and 
in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; as ye know what manner of 
men we were among you for your sake. 
 
And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the 
word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost: 
 
So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia. 
 
For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia 
and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to God-ward is spread 
abroad; so that we need not to speak any thing. 
 
For they themselves shew of us what manner of entering in we had unto 
you, and how ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true 
God; 
 
And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, 
even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come. 
 
For yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was 
not in vain: 
 
But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully 
entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak 
unto you the gospel of God with much contention. 
 
For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in 
guile: 
 
But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the gospel, even 
so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts. 
 
For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a 
cloke of covetousness; God is witness: 
 
Nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we 
might have been burdensome, as the apostles of Christ. 
 
But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children: 
 
So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have 
imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, 
because ye were dear unto us. 
 
For ye remember, brethren, our labour and travail: for labouring night 
and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we 
preached unto you the gospel of God. 
 
Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly and unblameably 
we behaved ourselves among you that believe: 
 
As ye know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, 
as a father doth his children, 
 
That ye would walk worthy of God, who hath called you unto his kingdom 
and glory. 
 
For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because, when ye 
received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as 
the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which 
effectually worketh also in you that believe. 
 
For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God which in 
Judaea are in Christ Jesus: for ye also have suffered like things of 
your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews: 
 
Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have 
persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men: 
 
Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to 
fill up their sins alway: for the wrath is come upon them to the 
uttermost. 
 
But we, brethren, being taken from you for a short time in presence, 
not in heart, endeavoured the more abundantly to see your face with 
great desire. 
 
Wherefore we would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and again; 
but Satan hindered us. 
 
For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye 
in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? 
 
For ye are our glory and joy. 
 
Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be 
left at Athens alone; 
 
And sent Timotheus, our brother, and minister of God, and our 
fellowlabourer in the gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to 
comfort you concerning your faith: 
 
That no man should be moved by these afflictions: for yourselves know 
that we are appointed thereunto. 
 
For verily, when we were with you, we told you before that we should 
suffer tribulation; even as it came to pass, and ye know. 
 
For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your 
faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labour 
be in vain. 
 
But now when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good 
tidings of your faith and charity, and that ye have good remembrance 
of us always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you: 
 
Therefore, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our affliction 
and distress by your faith: 
 
For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. 
 
For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy 
wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God; 
 
Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and 
might perfect that which is lacking in your faith? 
 
Now God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our 
way unto you. 
 
And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward 
another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: 
 
To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before 
God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all 
his saints. 
 
Furthermore then we beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord 
Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to 
please God, so ye would abound more and more. 
 
For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. 
 
For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should 
abstain from fornication: 
 
That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in 
sanctification and honour; 
 
Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not 
God: 
 
That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter: because 
that the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned 
you and testified. 
 
For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. 
 
He therefore that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath also 
given unto us his holy Spirit. 
 
But as touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto you: for 
ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another. 
 
And indeed ye do it toward all the brethren which are in all 
Macedonia: but we beseech you, brethren, that ye increase more and 
more; 
 
And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to 
work with your own hands, as we commanded you; 
 
That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye 
may have lack of nothing. 
 
But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them 
which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no 
hope. 
 
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also 
which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. 
 
For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are 
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them 
which are asleep. 
 
For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in 
Christ shall rise first: 
 
Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with 
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever 
be with the Lord. 
 
Wherefore comfort one another with these words. 
 
But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I 
write unto you. 
 
For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a 
thief in the night. 
 
For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction 
cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall 
not escape. 
 
But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake 
you as a thief. 
 
Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are 
not of the night, nor of darkness. 
 
Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be 
sober. 
 
For they that sleep sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are 
drunken in the night. 
 
But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate 
of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of salvation. 
 
For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our 
Lord Jesus Christ, 
 
Who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live 
together with him. 
 
Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, even as 
also ye do. 
 
And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labour among you, and 
are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; 
 
And to esteem them very highly in love for their work's sake. And be 
at peace among yourselves. 
 
Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the 
feebleminded, support the weak, be patient toward all men. 
 
See that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever follow that 
which is good, both among yourselves, and to all men. 
 
Rejoice evermore. 
 
Pray without ceasing. 
 
In every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ 
Jesus concerning you. 
 
Quench not the Spirit. 
 
Despise not prophesyings. 
 
Prove all things; hold fast that which is good. 
 
Abstain from all appearance of evil. 
 
And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your 
whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
 
Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it. 
 
Brethren, pray for us. 
 
Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss. 
 
I charge you by the Lord that this epistle be read unto all the holy 
brethren. 
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. 
 
The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonians 
 
Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the 
Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: 
 
Grace unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 
 
We are bound to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is meet, 
because that your faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of every 
one of you all toward each other aboundeth; 
 
So that we ourselves glory in you in the churches of God for your 
patience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye 
endure: 
 
Which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye 
may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer: 
 
Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to 
them that trouble you; 
 
And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be 
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, 
 
In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that 
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 
 
Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence 
of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; 
 
When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in 
all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) 
in that day. 
 
Wherefore also we pray always for you, that our God would count you 
worthy of this calling, and fulfil all the good pleasure of his 
goodness, and the work of faith with power: 
 
That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye 
in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
 
Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and by our gathering together unto him, 
 
That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, 
nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at 
hand. 
 
Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, 
except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be 
revealed, the son of perdition; 
 
Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or 
that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, 
shewing himself that he is God. 
 
Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these 
things? 
 
And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his 
time. 
 
For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth 
will let, until he be taken out of the way. 
 
And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume 
with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of 
his coming: 
 
Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power 
and signs and lying wonders, 
 
And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; 
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be 
saved. 
 
And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they 
should believe a lie: 
 
That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had 
pleasure in unrighteousness. 
 
But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you, brethren beloved 
of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen you to 
salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the 
truth: 
 
Whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of the glory 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
 
Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have 
been taught, whether by word, or our epistle. 
 
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, even our Father, which 
hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope 
through grace, 
 
Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work. 
 
Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have 
free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you: 
 
And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for all 
men have not faith. 
 
But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from 
evil. 
 
And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do and 
will do the things which we command you. 
 
And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the 
patient waiting for Christ. 
 
Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh 
disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us. 
 
For yourselves know how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not 
ourselves disorderly among you; 
 
Neither did we eat any man's bread for nought; but wrought with labour 
and travail night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of 
you: 
 
Not because we have not power, but to make ourselves an ensample unto 
you to follow us. 
 
For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any 
would not work, neither should he eat. 
 
For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, 
working not at all, but are busybodies. 
 
Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, 
that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread. 
 
But ye, brethren, be not weary in well doing. 
 
And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and 
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. 
 
Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. 
 
Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means. The 
Lord be with you all. 
 
The salutation of Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every 
epistle: so I write. 
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. 
 
The First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Timothy 
 
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our 
Saviour, and Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope; 
 
Unto Timothy, my own son in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from 
God our Father and Jesus Christ our Lord. 
 
As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into 
Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some that they teach no other 
doctrine, 
 
Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies, which minister 
questions, rather than godly edifying which is in faith: so do. 
 
Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of 
a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: 
 
From which some having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling; 
 
Desiring to be teachers of the law; understanding neither what they 
say, nor whereof they affirm. 
 
But we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully; 
 
Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for 
the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for 
unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, 
for manslayers, 
 
For whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for 
menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any 
other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine; 
 
According to the glorious gospel of the blessed God, which was 
committed to my trust. 
 
And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that he 
counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry; 
 
Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I 
obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. 
 
And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love 
which is in Christ Jesus. 
 
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ 
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief. 
 
Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ 
might shew forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should 
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. 
 
Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be 
honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
 
This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy, according to the 
prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them mightest war a 
good warfare; 
 
Holding faith, and a good conscience; which some having put away 
concerning faith have made shipwreck: 
 
Of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander; whom I have delivered unto Satan, 
that they may learn not to blaspheme. 
 
I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, 
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; 
 
For kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet 
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. 
 
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; 
 
Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of 
the truth. 
 
For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man 
Christ Jesus; 
 
Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. 
 
Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle, (I speak the truth 
in Christ, and lie not;) a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and 
verity. 
 
I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, 
without wrath and doubting. 
 
In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, 
with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or gold, or 
pearls, or costly array; 
 
But (which becometh women professing godliness) with good works. 
 
Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection. 
 
But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the 
man, but to be in silence. 
 
For Adam was first formed, then Eve. 
 
And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the 
transgression. 
 
Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue 
in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety. 
 
This is a true saying, If a man desire the office of a bishop, he 
desireth a good work. 
 
A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, 
sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach; 
 
Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but 
patient, not a brawler, not covetous; 
 
One that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection 
with all gravity; 
 
(For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take 
care of the church of God?) 
 
Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the 
condemnation of the devil. 
 
Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without; lest he 
fall into reproach and the snare of the devil. 
 
Likewise must the deacons be grave, not doubletongued, not given to 
much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre; 
 
Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. 
 
And let these also first be proved; then let them use the office of a 
deacon, being found blameless. 
 
Even so must their wives be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in 
all things. 
 
Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children and 
their own houses well. 
 
For they that have used the office of a deacon well purchase to 
themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in 
Christ Jesus. 
 
These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly: 
 
But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave 
thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, 
the pillar and ground of the truth. 
 
And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God was 
manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, 
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into 
glory. 
 
Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall 
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines 
of devils; 
 
Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot 
iron; 
 
Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God 
hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe 
and know the truth. 
 
For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be 
received with thanksgiving: 
 
For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. 
 
If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shalt be 
a good minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of faith 
and of good doctrine, whereunto thou hast attained. 
 
But refuse profane and old wives' fables, and exercise thyself rather 
unto godliness. 
 
For bodily exercise profiteth little: but godliness is profitable unto 
all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which 
is to come. 
 
This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation. 
 
For therefore we both labour and suffer reproach, because we trust in 
the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially of those that 
believe. 
 
These things command and teach. 
 
Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the believers, 
in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. 
 
Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. 
 
Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by 
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery. 
 
Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them; that thy 
profiting may appear to all. 
 
Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: for 
in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee. 
 
Rebuke not an elder, but intreat him as a father; and the younger men 
as brethren; 
 
The elder women as mothers; the younger as sisters, with all purity. 
 
Honour widows that are widows indeed. 
 
But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn first to 
shew piety at home, and to requite their parents: for that is good and 
acceptable before God. 
 
Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in God, and 
continueth in supplications and prayers night and day. 
 
But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth. 
 
And these things give in charge, that they may be blameless. 
 
But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own 
house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel. 
 
Let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years old, 
having been the wife of one man, 
 
Well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children, if 
she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the saints' feet, if she 
have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every 
good work. 
 
But the younger widows refuse: for when they have begun to wax wanton 
against Christ, they will marry; 
 
Having damnation, because they have cast off their first faith. 
 
And withal they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house; 
and not only idle, but tattlers also and busybodies, speaking things 
which they ought not. 
 
I will therefore that the younger women marry, bear children, guide 
the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully. 
 
For some are already turned aside after Satan. 
 
If any man or woman that believeth have widows, let them relieve them, 
and let not the church be charged; that it may relieve them that are 
widows indeed. 
 
Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour, 
especially they who labour in the word and doctrine. 
 
For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth 
out the corn. And, The labourer is worthy of his reward. 
 
Against an elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three 
witnesses. 
 
Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear. 
 
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect 
angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one before 
another, doing nothing by partiality. 
 
Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins: 
keep thyself pure. 
 
Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake 
and thine often infirmities. 
 
Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and 
some men they follow after. 
 
Likewise also the good works of some are manifest beforehand; and they 
that are otherwise cannot be hid. 
 
Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters 
worthy of all honour, that the name of God and his doctrine be not 
blasphemed. 
 
And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them, 
because they are brethren; but rather do them service, because they 
are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things teach 
and exhort. 
 
If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even 
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is 
according to godliness; 
 
He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes 
of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, 
 
Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the 
truth, supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw thyself. 
 
But godliness with contentment is great gain. 
 
For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry 
nothing out. 
 
And having food and raiment let us be therewith content. 
 
But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into 
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and 
perdition. 
 
For the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some 
coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves 
through with many sorrows. 
 
But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after 
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness. 
 
Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto 
thou art also called, and hast professed a good profession before many 
witnesses. 
 
I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all things, and 
before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good 
confession; 
 
That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the 
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: 
 
Which in his times he shall shew, who is the blessed and only 
Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; 
 
Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can 
approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour 
and power everlasting. Amen. 
 
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not highminded, 
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who giveth us 
richly all things to enjoy; 
 
That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to 
distribute, willing to communicate; 
 
Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time 
to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. 
 
O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane 
and vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so called: 
 
Which some professing have erred concerning the faith. Grace be with 
thee. Amen. 
 
The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Timothy 
 
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the 
promise of life which is in Christ Jesus, 
 
To Timothy, my dearly beloved son: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God 
the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord. 
 
I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience, 
that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night 
and day; 
 
Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may 
be filled with joy; 
 
When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which 
dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am 
persuaded that in thee also. 
 
Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, 
which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. 
 
For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of 
love, and of a sound mind. 
 
Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me 
his prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel 
according to the power of God; 
 
Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according 
to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was 
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began, 
 
But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, 
who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to 
light through the gospel: 
 
Whereunto I am appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of 
the Gentiles. 
 
For the which cause I also suffer these things: nevertheless I am not 
ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is 
able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day. 
 
Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in 
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. 
 
That good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the Holy Ghost 
which dwelleth in us. 
 
This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from 
me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes. 
 
The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft 
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: 
 
But, when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found 
me. 
 
The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that 
day: and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou 
knowest very well. 
 
Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ 
Jesus. 
 
And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the 
same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others 
also. 
 
Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. 
 
No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; 
that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. 
 
And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except 
he strive lawfully. 
 
The husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the fruits. 
 
Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all 
things. 
 
Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the 
dead according to my gospel: 
 
Wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the 
word of God is not bound. 
 
Therefore I endure all things for the elect's sakes, that they may 
also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. 
 
It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also 
live with him: 
 
If we suffer, we shall also reign with him: if we deny him, he also 
will deny us: 
 
If we believe not, yet he abideth faithful: he cannot deny himself. 
 
Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord 
that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the subverting 
of the hearers. 
 
Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to 
be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. 
 
But shun profane and vain babblings: for they will increase unto more 
ungodliness. 
 
And their word will eat as doth a canker: of whom is Hymenaeus and 
Philetus; 
 
Who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is 
past already; and overthrow the faith of some. 
 
Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, 
The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the 
name of Christ depart from iniquity. 
 
But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, 
but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to 
dishonour. 
 
If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto 
honour, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto 
every good work. 
 
Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, faith, charity, 
peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart. 
 
But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender 
strifes. 
 
And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all 
men, apt to teach, patient, 
 
In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God 
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the 
truth; 
 
And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, 
who are taken captive by him at his will. 
 
This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. 
 
For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, 
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, 
 
Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, 
fierce, despisers of those that are good, 
 
Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of 
God; 
 
Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such 
turn away. 
 
For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive 
silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts, 
 
Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. 
 
Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the 
truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. 
 
But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest 
unto all men, as theirs also was. 
 
But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, 
longsuffering, charity, patience, 
 
Persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, 
at Lystra; what persecutions I endured: but out of them all the Lord 
delivered me. 
 
Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution. 
 
But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and 
being deceived. 
 
But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been 
assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them; 
 
And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are 
able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ 
Jesus. 
 
All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for 
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in 
righteousness: 
 
That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good 
works. 
 
I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who 
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom; 
 
Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, 
exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine. 
 
For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but 
after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having 
itching ears; 
 
And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be 
turned unto fables. 
 
But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an 
evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry. 
 
For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at 
hand. 
 
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the 
faith: 
 
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the 
Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me 
only, but unto all them also that love his appearing. 
 
Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me: 
 
For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is 
departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia. 
 
Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with thee: for he is 
profitable to me for the ministry. 
 
And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus. 
 
The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring 
with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments. 
 
Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil: the Lord reward him 
according to his works: 
 
Of whom be thou ware also; for he hath greatly withstood our words. 
 
At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me: I 
pray God that it may not be laid to their charge. 
 
Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by 
me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might 
hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion. 
 
And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve 
me unto his heavenly kingdom: to whom be glory for ever and ever. 
Amen. 
 
Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus. 
 
Erastus abode at Corinth: but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick. 
 
Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and 
Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren. 
 
The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. Grace be with you. Amen. 
 
The Epistle of Paul to Titus 
 
Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to 
the faith of God's elect, and the acknowledging of the truth which is 
after godliness; 
 
In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before 
the world began; 
 
But hath in due times manifested his word through preaching, which is 
committed unto me according to the commandment of God our Saviour; 
 
To Titus, mine own son after the common faith: Grace, mercy, and 
peace, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour. 
 
For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order 
the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had 
appointed thee: 
 
If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children 
not accused of riot or unruly. 
 
For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God; not selfwilled, 
not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy 
lucre; 
 
But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy, 
temperate; 
 
Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be 
able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. 
 
For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially 
they of the circumcision: 
 
Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching 
things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake. 
 
One of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, The Cretians are 
alway liars, evil beasts, slow bellies. 
 
This witness is true. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be 
sound in the faith; 
 
Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men, that turn 
from the truth. 
 
Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them that are defiled and 
unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is 
defiled. 
 
They profess that they know God; but in works they deny him, being 
abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. 
 
But speak thou the things which become sound doctrine: 
 
That the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in 
charity, in patience. 
 
The aged women likewise, that they be in behaviour as becometh 
holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of good 
things; 
 
That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their 
husbands, to love their children, 
 
To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own 
husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed. 
 
Young men likewise exhort to be sober minded. 
 
In all things shewing thyself a pattern of good works: in doctrine 
shewing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity, 
 
Sound speech, that cannot be condemned; that he that is of the 
contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you. 
 
Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please 
them well in all things; not answering again; 
 
Not purloining, but shewing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the 
doctrine of God our Saviour in all things. 
 
For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, 
 
Teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should 
live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; 
 
Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great 
God and our Saviour Jesus Christ; 
 
Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, 
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. 
 
These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no 
man despise thee. 
 
Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey 
magistrates, to be ready to every good work, 
 
To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, shewing all 
meekness unto all men. 
 
For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, 
serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, 
hateful, and hating one another. 
 
But after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man 
appeared, 
 
Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his 
mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the 
Holy Ghost; 
 
Which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour; 
 
That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according 
to the hope of eternal life. 
 
This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm 
constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to 
maintain good works. These things are good and profitable unto men. 
 
But avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and 
strivings about the law; for they are unprofitable and vain. 
 
A man that is an heretick after the first and second admonition 
reject; 
 
Knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sinneth, being 
condemned of himself. 
 
When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to come 
unto me to Nicopolis: for I have determined there to winter. 
 
Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey diligently, that 
nothing be wanting unto them. 
 
And let ours also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, 
that they be not unfruitful. 
 
All that are with me salute thee. Greet them that love us in the 
faith. Grace be with you all. Amen. 
 
The Epistle of Paul to Philemon 
 
Chapter 1 
 
Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, unto 
Philemon our dearly beloved, and fellowlabourer, 
 
And to our beloved Apphia, and Archippus our fellowsoldier, and to the 
church in thy house: 
 
Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 
 
I thank my God, making mention of thee always in my prayers, 
 
Hearing of thy love and faith, which thou hast toward the Lord Jesus, 
and toward all saints; 
 
That the communication of thy faith may become effectual by the 
acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus. 
 
For we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the bowels 
of the saints are refreshed by thee, brother. 
 
Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that 
which is convenient, 
 
Yet for love's sake I rather beseech thee, being such an one as Paul 
the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ. 
 
I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds: 
 
Which in time past was to thee unprofitable, but now profitable to 
thee and to me: 
 
Whom I have sent again: thou therefore receive him, that is, mine own 
bowels: 
 
Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have 
ministered unto me in the bonds of the gospel: 
 
But without thy mind would I do nothing; that thy benefit should not 
be as it were of necessity, but willingly. 
 
For perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou shouldest 
receive him for ever; 
 
Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved, 
specially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh, and 
in the Lord? 
 
If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as myself. 
 
If he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought, put that on mine 
account; 
 
I Paul have written it with mine own hand, I will repay it: albeit I 
do not say to thee how thou owest unto me even thine own self besides. 
 
Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in the Lord: refresh my bowels 
in the Lord. 
 
Having confidence in thy obedience I wrote unto thee, knowing that 
thou wilt also do more than I say. 
 
But withal prepare me also a lodging: for I trust that through your 
prayers I shall be given unto you. 
 
There salute thee Epaphras, my fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus; 
 
Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my fellowlabourers. 
 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. 
 
